                               Supplementary Materials for
            Predicting protein-protein interactions in the human proteome

                                              Jing Zhang et al.

                         Corresponding author: Qian Cong, qian.cong@utsouthwestern.edu

                                         DOI: 10.1126/science.adt1630

The PDF file includes:

      Supplementary Methods
      Supplementary Results
      Figs. S1 to S40
      Tables S1 to S8
      References

Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:

      MDAR Reproducibility Checklist
      Data S1 to S8
Supplemental Methods
M1. Gathering experimental data and preparing benchmark sets
We downloaded 3D structure models of the human proteome that were modeled by AlphaFold2 (11)
and released through the AlphaFold protein structure DataBase (AFDB) (33). These models cover
nearly all reviewed entries from the human proteome UP000005640 released in Uniprot version
2021_02. We used AFDB models to parse each human protein into domains, which allowed us to split
large proteins into smaller segments that fit into the limited memory of our GPUs (mostly below 48 GB).
Out of the 20,504 proteins, we excluded a small fraction (208, 1%) of long proteins that were modeled
in multiple frames, and the remaining 20,296 human proteins which we call, the human protein set,
were used in this study.

We utilized three well-established and constantly updated databases to gather experimental data about
physical protein-protein interactions (PPIs) formed by proteins from the human protein set (Figure
S1). First, we obtained the interacting partners for each protein from UniProt (accessed in Nov 2023)
by turning on the “interacts with” column and downloading the customized table. We obtained 75,739
candidate interactions, namely, the UniProt PPIs. Second, we downloaded the entire set of interactions
(BIOGRID-ALL), the human-specific set (BIOGRID-ORGANISM-Homo_sapiens), and the set of
confident PPIs validated in multiple experiments (BIOGRID-MV-Physical) from the BioGRID database
(version 4.4.225) (5). Human PPIs from BioGRID are mostly physical interactions, with only 1.5%
genetic interactions; we thus did not discard the genetic interactions from these datasets. From the
BioGRID sets, we extracted PPIs between proteins in our human protein set, resulting in 771,432
candidate interacting pairs, i.e., BioGRID PPIs. Among these pairs, 77,147 are regarded as confident
PPIs according to BioGRID (belonging to the multi-validated set), and we name them as confident
BioGRID PPIs. Third, we downloaded physical interactions of human proteins
(9606.protein.physical.links) from the STRING (version 12.0) database (6). In addition, we downloaded
the human protein sequences (9606.protein.sequences) used in the STRING database, which allowed
us to map the STRING human proteins to our human protein set by MMseqs (-s 7 -a 1) (75). We
considered a STRING protein to be equivalent to one in our human protein set if their identity in
sequence is above 95% and the aligned residues covered more than 90% of the query and the hit.
Based on information from STRING, we identified 626,513 candidate PPIs, i.e., STRING PPIs; among
them, 68,761 PPIs are considered confident (confident STRING PPIs) with STRING combined scores
above 700 (a cutoff suggested by the STRING database).

We compared the sets of UniProt PPIs, confident BioGRID PPIs, and confident STRING PPIs, and
found a surprisingly poor consistency between the three sets (Figure S1): only 3,988 PPIs were
included in all three datasets, with 22,184 additional pairs supported by two out of the three databases.
This poor consistency highlights the difficulty of identifying true interacting partners for a human protein.
PPIs from these databases are mostly from large-scale experimental studies that are plagued by non-
specific interactions in non-physiological conditions. Therefore, they are expected to contain a very high
rate of false positives. We took the 3,988 PPIs shared by all three databases as the positive control
set. This positive control set was used to monitor the performance of our newly developed AI network,
RoseTTAFold2-PPI (RF2-PPI) in the process of optimizing the training routine and network architecture.
To ensure that the improved performance we observed is not a result of over-optimization on this
positive control set, we derived an additional positive test set made up of 22,184 PPIs supported by
only two databases.



                                                                                                           2
       Figure S1. The procedure for preparing positive controls (top) and a Venn diagram
    illustrating the consistency between confident PPIs obtained from different databases.

In addition to the sets of physically interacting protein pairs mentioned above, we obtained functionally
related human protein pairs from the STRING database (9606.protein.links). While functionally related
proteins mostly do not directly interact with each other, they are useful to derive the negative controls,
for which we want to exclude any protein pairs that may function together. We enumerated all possible
pairs of proteins in our human protein set, and excluded pairs from any of the aforementioned sets of
physical or genetic interactions. In addition, we removed any pairs that are homologous to pairs in these
datasets because an interacting partner of a protein is more likely to interact with its homologs than
another random protein. As a result, we obtained a negative control set containing 140,156,818
random protein pairs without prior evidence of interaction.




M2. Generating multiple sequence alignments from genomic data
M2.1 Stage1: gathering genomic datasets for Eukaryotes
Gathering draft genomes from NCBI genome database
We used NCBI’s command-line tool to gather genomic datasets and their accessory information from
the NCBI genome and Sequence Read Archive (SRA) databases, following instructions provided at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/docs/v2/download-and-install/. We collected information about
eukaryotic genomes (till May 2023) using the following command: $ datasets summary genome taxon
Eukaryota --exclude-atypical -as-json-lines. The “exclude-atypical” flag excludes the problematic
assemblies detected by NCBI. From the resulting JSON file, we extracted the contig N50, scaffold N50,
and the number of protein-coding genes annotated from each genome. The N50 value represents the
                                                                                                        3
length of the contig or scaffold such that 50% of the entire assembly’s length is contained in contigs or
scaffolds of that length or longer. N50 is a major indicator of genome assembly quality, and one cannot
conveniently predict protein sequences from assemblies with a very low N50, because the coding
sequences of many proteins might be split into different contigs or scaffolds. Thus, we only kept
genomes with scaffold N50 or contig N50 above 50,000.

We extracted the TaxID of each genome assembly and assigned each assembly to a taxonomic lineage
(phylum, class, order, family, genus, species) based on tables downloaded from the NCBI taxonomy
database at: https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/. We selected the best genome assembly for
each species: if a species contains assemblies that are marked as “reference” by NCBI, we considered
these “reference” assemblies as candidates; if not, all assemblies were regarded as candidates. From
these candidates, we selected the assembly with the largest scaffold or contig N50 among those with
assembly size above 0.9 ⋅ median assembly size for this species. As a result, we selected 9,337
genome assemblies representing 9,337 species, with the largest number of genomes from the Chordata,
Arthropoda, and Ascomycota (Table S1). Data for the selected genomes were downloaded from NCBI
using command-lines as follows: $ datasets download genome [assembly_accession] --include
genome,protein,gff3.

        Table S1. Statistics of selected representative genomes for eukaryotic species.
                                # genomes with        # genomes without
             Phylum                                                               # genomes
                                   proteomes              proteomes
     Chordata                          357                    1,820                  2,177
     Arthropoda                        143                    1,403                  1,546
     Ascomycota                        938                    1,773                  2,711
     Streptophyta                      191                     832                   1,023
     Basidiomycota                     356                     350                    706
     Others                            466                     708                   1,174
     All                              2,451                   6,886                  9,337


Most of these genomes are not annotated with protein-coding sequences, and some are associated
with only several protein-coding genes. Because complete eukaryotic genomes should at least encode
several thousands of proteins, we considered genome assemblies with at least 4,000 protein-coding
genes to be associated with proteomes. 2,451 of these 9,337 genomes are associated with proteomes.
We used these proteomes to assist us in assembling and aligning orthologous sequences for human
proteins from diverse eukaryotic species. It is important to note that these proteomes are not necessarily
complete or of high quality, and thus we still attempted to directly predict protein sequences from the
genomes that are associated with proteomes (see M2.2).



Gathering genomic and transcriptomic reads from NCBI SRA database
For other Eukaryotes without assembled genomes, we set out to use the unassembled genomic and
transcriptomic reads from NCBI SRA database, which contained around 30 Petabytes of data in May
2023. First, we downloaded the metadata of these sequencing reads using the NCBI E-utility tools with
the following command: $ esearch -db sra -query "Eukaryota[Organism] NOT txid9606[Organism:exp]
NOT txid9612[Organism:exp] NOT txid6239[Organism:exp] NOT txid4522[Organism:exp] NOT
txid9031[Organism:exp] NOT txid9544[Organism:exp] NOT txid7165[Organism:exp] NOT
txid9913[Organism:exp] NOT txid7227[Organism:exp] NOT txid9823[Organism:exp] NOT
txid10116[Organism:exp] NOT txid7955[Organism:exp] NOT txid4565[Organism:exp] NOT

                                                                                                        4
txid4530[Organism:exp] NOT txid4577[Organism:exp] NOT txid4513[Organism:exp] NOT
txid3702[Organism:exp] NOT txid5833[Organism:exp] NOT txid4932[Organism:exp] NOT
txid10090[Organism:exp]" | efetch -format runinfo. This command extracted all records from Eukaryotes
excluding the 20 species as specified by their TaxIDs. Based on the information we obtained by
browsing the SRA website, these 20 species are associated with the largest numbers of SRA datasets.
Because assembled genomes are available for these 20 species, we did not need their genomic or
transcriptomic reads. However, these 20 most frequent species constitute 75% of the SRA datasets,
and excluding them significantly reduced the time to download the metadata for the rest.

From these metadata, we extracted information about each SRA dataset. We selected whole
transcriptomic and whole genomic reads sequenced by illumina, which not only generate high-quality
data but also constitute most of the SRA datasets. Specifically, we used the following criteria to select
the desirable datasets based on their metadata. Instrument: HiSeq X Five, NextSeq 2000, Illumina
HiSeq X Ten, Illumina Genome Analyzer II, Illumina HiSeq 1000, Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx,
NextSeq 550, Illumina HiSeq 1500, Illumina HiSeq X, Illumina HiSeq 3000, HiSeq X Ten, NextSeq 500,
Illumina NovaSeq 6000, Illumina HiSeq 4000, Illumina MiSeq, Illumina HiSeq 2000, or Illumina HiSeq
2500; Library Source: TRANSCRIPTOMIC or GENOMIC; Library Strategy: RNA-Seq, WGS, or
OTHER; Library Selection: Oligo-dT, PolyA, other, other, unspecified, cDNA, RANDOM, PCR. We
only focused on datasets of moderate sizes: small ones will not be sufficient to cover the entire genomes
or transcriptomes; while extremely large ones will be a challenge for data storage and downstream
processing. As such, we only used datasets with at least 100M bases; we discarded transcriptomic
datasets with larger than 100G bases or genomic datasets with larger than 300G bases.

We also extracted the “Organism Name” of each dataset, and assigned it to a taxonomic lineage based
on tables downloaded from the NCBI taxonomy database. We reasoned that the necessary amount of
sequencing to cover the entire genomes or transcriptomes vary by taxonomic lineages. To derive
lineage-specific cutoffs for the amount of sequencing data, we computed the median amount of genomic
and transcriptomic data, respectively, for each phylum (𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑝𝑝ℎ and 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑝𝑝ℎ ), class (𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 and 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ), order
(𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 and 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 ), family (𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 and 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 ), and genus (𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 and 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 ). We computed the cutoff for
the amount of genomic ( 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 ) or transcriptomic ( 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 ) data for a species as 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 = 0.95 ⋅
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝐺𝐺𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝ℎ , 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 , 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 , 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 , 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 ) and 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 = 0.95 ⋅ 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝑇𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝ℎ , 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 , 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 , 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 , 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 ) . For
each species without genomic assemblies extracted from NCBI genome database, we selected the
largest genomic dataset from SRA with bases less than 300G and above 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 and the largest
transcriptomic dataset with bases less than 100G and above 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇. As a result, genomic datasets for
23,733 species and transcriptomic datasets for 16,820 species were selected.

Due to the limitation in disk space, we only focused on species from two largest phyla that are relatively
close to humans, Chordata (4,585 genomic datasets and 2,055 transcriptomic datasets, representing
6,053 species) and Arthropoda (4,697 genomic datasets and 4,792 transcriptomic datasets,
representing 9,069 species). Other phylums that are close to humans, Echinodermata and
Hemichordata, have very few (around 200) SRA datasets and thus were not used. We downloaded
these SRA reads using sra-toolkit with commands like: $ fastq-dump [accession] --split-3 --skip-
technical –fasta –quiet.




                                                                                                                                                   5
M2.2 Stage2: assembling orthologs from draft genomes associated with
proteomes
We processed 2,451 genomes (representing 2,451 species) associated with annotated protein
sequences, i.e., proteomes. From each genome, we used multiple strategies to find candidate
orthologous sequences for each human protein, including: 1) direct detection of orthologs from the
proteome using human proteins as queries; 2) indirect detection of orthologs from the proteome using
proteins of other model organisms as queries; 3) direct assembling from the genome using human
proteins as queries; and 4) indirect assembling from the genome using proteins of other model
organisms as queries. The two direct strategies were used for all genomes, while the indirect strategies
using queries of other model organisms were only applied to species in two of the largest phylums,
Arthropoda and Ascomycota.

The reference protein sets of Drosophila melanogaster and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast), were
used to facilitate ortholog detection and protein sequence assembly from Arthropoda and Ascomycota
genomes, respectively. We reasoned that using reference proteins from more closely related species
might increase the accuracy for sequence assembly and ortholog detection, because aligning more
divergent sequences or distinguishing orthologs from paralogs between more divergent species might
be challenging. The reference protein sets of Drosophila and yeast were further mapped to their human
orthologs based on reciprocal best hit criteria (see M2.3); thus the candidate orthologs assigned to
Drosophila or yeast proteins will be propagated to their human orthologs. The large evolutionary
distance between human and Drosophila/yeast and the fact that humans have experienced several
whole genome-wide duplications in relation to these lower Eukaryotes will conflate ortholog detection.
Nevertheless, the fact that these best-studied model organisms have complete protein sets and
accurate protein sequences will likely make it easier to find orthologs between them and humans.



Detecting orthologs from proteomes
To detect orthologs of a reference protein from a target proteome (Figure S2A), we first found homologs
for each reference protein using BLAST, keeping hits with e-value < 0.0001 and identity > 0.5 ᐧ top-hit
identity. BLAST may separate the alignment between the query and a hit into multiple High Scoring
Pairs (HSPs, i.e., aligned segments between a query and a hit) if the hit experiences large insertions
or deletions relative to the query, which is not uncommon for eukaryotic sequences due to alternative
splicing. Thus, we designed routines to compare multiple HSPs and merge compatible ones. We
merged pairs of HSPs if they satisfied the following criteria: 1) overlap in covered query residues by
both HSPs is smaller than half of their coverage in the query; 2) overlap in covered hit residues by both
HSPs is smaller than half of their coverage in the hit; 3) merging the two HSPs can extend the query
coverage by both HSP by at least 30 residues. If two HSPs should be merged, in their overlapping
region, we chose the one displaying higher sequence similarity (measured by total blosum62 scores)
between the query and the hit. This HSP merging routine could combine several HSPs into one
alignment between the query and a hit, and if there were more than one merged alignment for a hit, the
one including the HSP showing the lowest e-value was kept. As a result, we obtained only one alignment
for each query-hit pair.

Among the hits for each query, we used a relaxed reciprocal best hit criteria to select candidate
orthologs, allowing each query to have multiple best hits showing comparable similarities to the query.
First, we found pairs of hits that overlap remarkably in the query residues they mapped to (overlap >
0.5 ᐧ query coverage by either hit), and we removed one of them, e.g., hit1, if it showed lower similarity

                                                                                                        6
to the query than the other hit, i.e., hit2 by the following criteria: 1) over the entire alignment, the total
blosum62 score for hit1 ᐧ 1.5 < the total blosum62 score for hit2; 2) over the query residues covered by
both hits, the average blosum score for hit1 ᐧ 1.1 < the average blosum score for hit2. Second, for each
hit from a target proteome, we analyzed the query reference proteins aligned to this hit. We compared
every pair of query proteins mapping to overlapping regions in the hit (overlap > 0.5 ᐧ hit coverage by
either query) and removed the query showing lower similarity to the hit than the other, according to the
same criteria as described above. All candidate orthologs were used to build the MSA for a query human
protein and the closest hit was selected based on statistics calculated from the final MSA (see M2.5).



Assembling orthologous sequences from genomes




     Figure S2. Pipelines (A) to detect candidate orthologs for each reference protein from
         proteomes and (B) to assemble candidate orthologs directly from genomes.

We were concerned with the quality and completeness of the annotated proteins in these draft genomes,
and therefore, we designed a pipeline (Figure S2B) to directly assemble protein sequences from the
genomes using a set of reference proteins (from human, Drosophila, or yeast). In this pipeline, we first
identified the genomic segments encoding homologs of a query protein. On the one hand, we found
homologs of a query by BLAST against the proteome. We merged the compatible HSPs to generate
one alignment per hit as described above. We identified the best several hits for each query that
satisfied the following criteria: 1) coverage to query by a hit is larger than the maximal query coverage

                                                                                                            7
among all hits; and 2) the total blosum62 score between the query and a hit is larger than the maximal
total blosum62 score among all hits. We looked up where each selected hit mapped to in the genome
based on the genome annotation file we downloaded from NCBI (GFF format) for each proteome, and
these genomic regions (from the start site of a coding gene to the end site) were used as homologous
genomic segments.

On the other hand, we directly found homologous genomic segments for each query by mapping it
to the genome with MMseqs. We choose MMseqs due to its superior speed for aligning thousands of
query proteins to a genome. For optimal speed, we prepared all query proteins in a reference species
(human, Drosophila, or yeast) into a database using the “createdb” command in MMseqs. Similarly, we
prepared another database with all the scaffolds from a target genome. We searched the database with
query proteins against the one with scaffolds of a target genome using the following command:
$ mmseqs search [query_database] [genome_database] [output_prefix] [temporary_directory] --start-
sens 3 --sens-steps 2 -s 7 -a 1 --threads 32. MMseqs aligns each query protein to open-reading frames
(ORFs) in a target genome, and these aligned ORFs likely correspond to exons or partial exons of a
gene encoding a homologous protein to the query.

We processed the MMseqs output to group multiple ORFs aligned to a query into a potential protein-
coding gene. The alignment between a segment in the query and a hit ORF can be considered as an
HSP (high-scoring pair). We kept HSPs with e-value < 0.001 and considered pairs of HSPs compatible
to each other if they satisfied the following criteria: 1) their overlap in aligned query residues is shorter
than half of the aligned query residues of both HSPs; 2) their overlap in aligned genomic bases is shorter
than a quarter of the aligned genomic bases of both HSPs; 3) the hit ORFs are on the same strand of
the same scaffold; 4) the genomic distance between the two hit ORFs is shorter than the 95% quantile
of gene size (distance between the first and the last base in the coding sequence) in the target genome;
and 5) the order of aligned regions in the query is consistent with the order of aligned regions in the hit
ORFs (Figure S3). Starting from the HSP showing the lowest e-value, we merged an HSP into a group
if it is compatible with all existing HSPs in the group; otherwise, we started a new group with this HSP.
Each HSP group represents a gene encoding a homolog to the query. We evaluated each HSP group’s
similarity to the query based on the total blosum62 score (𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 ) of the aligned residues in these
HSPs and the total number of covered query residues by them (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 ). We kept HSP groups
showing 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 > 0.67 ⋅ 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 ) and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 > 0.67 ⋅ 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 ). We extracted a
minimal continuous genomic segment that completely covered the HSPs in each group, which
represented a homologous genomic segment to the query.




     Figure S3. HSPs that are consistent in their orders on the query protein and hit genome.

We analyzed the homologous genomic segments for each query protein found by the above
approaches. We merged segments 1) from the same strand of the same scaffold and 2) showing
overlap in their genomic coordinates, the resulting merged segments were aligned to the query protein
using exonerate (23) and miniprot (22). We parsed outputs of these tools to extract the coding
sequences for homologs of the query. In contrast to MMseqs, exonerate and miniprot are aware of
splicing sites, and thus they are able to align a protein sequence to multiple exons, skipping long introns.

                                                                                                                                         8
However, we observed that both exonerate and miniprot still frequently split the alignment between a
query and a homologous genomic segment into multiple HSPs covering different regions of the query
protein. Therefore, we compared pairs of HSPs from each program and merged HSPs satisfying the
following criteria. First, their overlap in aligned query residues is shorter than half of the aligned query
residues of both HSPs. Second, the aligned regions in the target genome have no overlap in their
genomic coordinates. Third, the arrangement of these HSPs on the genome are consistent with their
order on the query protein: 1) if they are on the same scaffold, their distance should be than 200,000
bp and the order of the hits on the genome should be consistent to the aligned regions in the query
protein (as in Figure S3); 2) if they are on different scaffolds, both of them should be near the end (<
20,000 bp away) of the scaffolds and consistent with the assumption that the two scaffolds can be
concatenated to form the coding sequence of a homolog to the query protein (as in Figure S4). When
two HSPs were merged, in the query regions covered by both HSPs, the HSP showing higher similarity
between the query and the hit was taken.

In addition, we observed a decay in alignment quality towards the beginnings and ends of HSPs, which
is likely a result of failing to find the true exons. To fix these problems, we calculated the average
blosum62 score for each exon in each HSP, and if an exon at the edge (the beginning or the end)
showed average blosum62 score lower than ⅔ of the scores for the exons in the middle, we shrunk the
alignment and excluded this exon.




     Figure S4. HSPs that are consistent in their arrangement on the query protein and hit
                genomic segments from different scaffolds of a draft genome.

Among the homologs for each query found by exonerate and exonerate, we used a relaxed reciprocal
best hit criteria to select candidate orthologs as described above, allowing each query to have multiple
candidate orthologs with comparable similarities. First, we found pairs of coding sequences with >50%
overlap in the query residues they mapped to, and we removed one of them (sequence1) if it showed
lower similarity to the query than the other (sequence2) by the following criteria: 1) over the entire
alignment, the total blosum62 score of sequence1 ᐧ 1.5 < the total blosum62 score for sequence2; 2)
over the query residues covered by both sequences, the average blosum62 score for sequence1 ᐧ 1.1
< the average blosum62 score for sequence2. Second, for pairs of homologous coding sequences of
different queries showing >50% overlap in their genomic coordinates, we removed one of the queries
(query1) if it showed lower similarity to the coding sequence than the other (query2) by the following
criteria: 1) over the entire alignment, the total blosum62 score for query1 ᐧ 1.5 < the total blosum62
score for query2; 2) over the genomic positions that were mapped to by both queries, the average
blosum62 score for query1 ᐧ 1.5 < the average blosum62 score for query2. The selected coding
sequences for each query by these criteria were translated into protein sequences and considered as
candidate orthologs of the query. All the candidates were used to build the MSA for each query human
protein and the closest hit to the query was selected based on statistics calculated from the final MSA
(see M2.5).




                                                                                                          9
Comparing the “from proteome” and the “from genome” strategies
We wondered whether direct assembly of sequences from the genomes would help us to find the
orthologous proteins or segments (e.g. an exon) that were missed in the set of annotated proteins. For
each query, we examined its alignment to the best candidate ortholog (the hit showing the highest total
blosum62 score over all aligned positions) found either by BLAST search against a proteome (the “from
proteome” strategy) or by exonerate/miniprot search against a genomic segment (the “from genome”
strategy). We partitioned the aligned positions by these two strategies into bins based on the blosum62
score between the query and hit residues. We found that to assemble orthologs from Chordata species
for human proteins, the “from genome” strategy generated more aligned residues in each blosum62
score bin, suggesting that this strategy allowed us to assemble more complete sequences and obtain
better alignments (Figure S5A). We observed the same trend for assembling sequences from
Arthopoda species using Drosophila proteins as the reference (Figure S5B). However, the “from
genome” strategy generated less aligned residues in each blosum62 score bin than the “from proteome”
strategy when human proteins were used as reference to assemble orthologs from non-Chordata
species (Figure S5C). Similarly, direct assembling of sequences from Ascomycota genomes using
Yeast proteins as references also did not generate better alignments than the “from proteome” strategy
(Figure S5D).




   Figure S5. The distribution of blosum62 scores for aligned positions between reference
    proteins and their orthologs detected from proteomes (blue bars) or assembled from
 genomes (red bars). The X-axis is the blosum62 score between a pair of aligned residues, and Y-
 axis is the percentage of residue pairs. The two peaks correspond to the scores between identical
           residues (high blosum62 scores) and different residues (low blosum62 scores).




                                                                                                    10
These results showed that when the reference protein set is closely related to the target genome, the
“from genome” strategy is expected to obtain better alignments than the “from proteome” strategy. When
the evolutionary distance between the reference and the target is large, such as between humans and
non-Chordata species, assembling coding sequences in the target genomes by aligning them to the
reference proteins is challenging. In contrast, the previously annotated proteins in these target genomes
were likely based on RNA-seq evidence or homologs from more closely related species, resulting in a
more complete set of annotated proteins and more complete protein sequences. These results suggest
that direct assembling of protein sequences from draft genomes is an efficient strategy to obtain deeper
MSAs for human proteins. However, for target genomes showing large evolutionary distances to
humans, the proteomes of more closely related species should be used as references.




M2.3 Stage3: assembling orthologs from draft genomes
We gathered candidate orthologs assembled by different strategies in the previous stage. Some of
these sequences were assembled using the Drosophila or yeast proteins as references. To assign them
to human proteins, we assigned each Drosophila and yeast protein to its human orthologs (allowing
multiple orthologs) based on the relaxed reciprocal best hit strategy described above (Figure S2A). We
aligned each query human protein to its candidate orthologs using HMMER (76) with the following
command: $ phmmer -o /dev/null --noali --notextw --incE 1e-2 -E 1e-2 --cpu 4 -A [output] [human_query]
[all_candidate_orthologs]. Based on the output alignment for each human protein, we computed the
similarity score (𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 ) for each candidate ortholog (hit) as the sum of positive blosum62 scores of
aligned residues (gaps or aligned positions with negative blosum score did not contribute). For each
query protein, we selected its best hit with the highest 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 from each species, genus, family, order,
class, and phylum, and the similarity scores for these best hits were denoted as 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 ,
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 , 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 , 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 , and 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑝𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑦 .

For each species processed in the previous stage, we generated a revised proteome to be used as a
reference for orthologous sequence assembly in this stage. We built this revised proteome based on
the following ideas: 1) we selected the best hit from this species for each human protein, if available; 2)
if a best hit is not available in this species (possibly due to gene loss in evolution or in the process of
genome assembly and annotation), we replaced it with the best hit from higher taxonomic ranks; 3) if
the best hit in a higher taxonomic rank shows remarkably (1.2 times) higher similarity to the query, we
used it to replace the best hit in this species. In practice, we computed preference scores for the best
hits in this species and higher taxonomic ranks as: 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 ⋅ 1.25 + 0.5; 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 ⋅
1.24 + 0.4 ; 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 ⋅ 1.23 + 0.3 ; 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 ⋅ 1.22 + 0.2 ; 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ⋅ 1.2 + 0.1 ;
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑦 = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑝𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑦 . For each query protein and each proteome assembled in the previous stage, we
selected the best hit with maximal preference score and added it to the revised proteome. These revised
proteomes were used as references for assembling proteins from other draft genomes without
annotated proteins in this stage.

For each draft genome (target) without annotated proteins, we found its closely related reference
proteome based on taxonomic information. We went up the taxonomic ranks of a target genome, from
genus to phylum, to find the rank with available reference proteomes in the same rank. At that taxonomic
rank, we selected the reference proteome covering the largest number of human residues in the
alignments made by phmmer (see above) between every human proteome and each reference

                                                                                                                                              11
proteome. Both the closely related reference proteome and the human proteome were used to
assemble candidate orthologs from the target genome, using a pipeline (Figure S6) similar to the one
used in the previous stage. However, since the target genome is not associated with a proteome, we
could not use previously annotated proteins to help us to find the homologous genomic segments for
a query protein.




   Figure S6. A pipeline to assemble sequences of candidate orthologs from draft genomes
                                 without annotated proteins.

We gathered the candidate orthologs assembled from each target genome using the human proteome
or the selected, closely related, proteome as a reference. Since each of the additional reference
proteomes was made of orthologs of human proteins, assembled sequences based on these references
could be easily assigned as candidate orthologs of human proteins. We again aligned each query
human protein to its candidate orthologs using HMMER. Based on the output alignments, we counted
the number of residues in the human proteins that were covered by the orthologs assembled by different
strategies. We found that for Chordata species, using human proteins as queries resulted in slightly
(1.005 times) higher coverage of human protein residues by the assembled sequences. However, for
non-Chordata species, assembling sequences with more closely related references resulted in
remarkably (1.14 times) higher coverage over human proteins (i.e. more complete assembled
proteomes) on average.




                                                                                                   12
M2.4 Stage4: assembling orthologs from genomic and transcriptomic reads
We gathered the proteomes assembled in the previous stages (M2.2 and M2.3). We revised these
proteomes using the same strategy as described in M2.3. Briefly, for each human query protein, we
selected its best hit showing the highest identity within each taxonomic rank. We generated revised
proteomes by replacing proteins with such best hits if the best hits show considerably higher similarity
to the human orthologs. These revised proteomes were used as reference proteomes to assemble
sequences from genomic or transcriptomic reads. For each genomic or transcriptomic dataset (target),
we found its closely related reference proteome based on taxonomic information (see M2.3 for details).

Because transcriptomic reads are mostly not expected to contain introns, we used whole protein
sequences as references (reference protein set) to align to these reads and assemble transcript
sequences. In contrast, genomic reads are expected to contain introns, and using the whole protein
sequences containing multiple exons might cause the alignment to incorrectly extend to introns.
Therefore, to search against the genomic reads, we first split the reference proteins into exons, taking
advantage of the fact that the splicing sites are usually conserved among closely related species (77).
We used these exon sequences (reference exon set) to align to genomic reads of a target species and
assemble exon sequences, which were then concatenated to get assembled protein sequences from a
target species. The strategies we used to assemble sequences from a target species is summarized in
Figure S7.




      Figure S7. The strategy to assemble orthologous sequences from transcriptomic and
              genomic reads using closely related reference exon and protein sets.




                                                                                                     13
Finding the most similar reference protein/exon for each sequencing read
We aligned the genomic reads of each target species to the reference exon set; we aligned the
transcriptome reads of each target species to the reference protein set. We used DIAMOND (78), a fast
program optimized for handling large amounts of reads, for this task. We made each reference set into
a database using the following command: $ diamond makedb -- in [reference_basename].fasta -d
[reference_basename]. We then aligned the reads to the references using commands like: $ diamond
blastx --query [reads_in_fasta_format] --db [reference_basename].dmnd -l 1 -k 0 --comp-based-stats 1
--masking 0 --out [output_prefix].tab -f 6 qseqid sseqid evalue pident qlen qstart qend slen sstart send
qseq_gapped sseq_gapped --evalue 0.01 --unal 0 -p 28.

We processed the DIAMOND results to keep the alignments between a read and its most closely related
queries. If a read was aligned to multiple queries, we compared each pair of read-query alignments and
removed the alignment (alnA) showing remarkably worse quality than the other alignment (alnB)
according to either of the following two criteria based on e-value and sequence identity: 1) 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 >
              1.2
𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎     and 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 < 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 or 2) 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 > 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 and 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 <
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 − 10. This process is equivalent to the "forward best hit" criterion used in ortholog detection.
In the later stage, we only kept the reads showing the highest similarity to each query, equivalent to the
"reverse best hit" criterion used in ortholog detection. They together constitute the "reciprocal best hit"
strategy and ensure that only the reads from the orthologous protein of the reference exon/protein will
be used to assemble the exon/protein sequences in each target species.

The large volume (about 100T at this stage) of our datasets created additional difficulties. Sometimes
a reference protein or exon might map to repeats in the genome of a target species, and such reference
protein/exon will be aligned to millions of reads, generating outputs that challenge both our file storage
system and our speed to process the DIAMOND outputs. To solve this problem, we first took a sample
of 100,000 reads from each genomic dataset, respectively, and we aligned this sample to the reference
and processed the outputs as described above. Based on the results, we computed the sequencing
depth at each position (total number of aligned reads covering that position), and we masked positions
with depth above 50 by replacing the amino acid at these positions with “X”. We then used the entire
set of genomic reads to align to the masked reference sequences and processed the outputs as
described above.



Filtering aligned reads based on statistics derived from outgroups
In rare cases where the orthologs for a reference protein or exon were lost in evolution or not covered
by the sequencing reads, non-orthologous reads that cannot map to other exons might be mistakenly
identified as orthologs. We, therefore, introduced another set of criteria to filter the reads in a target
species by similarity to the reference in addition to the reciprocal best hit criterion. A generic sequence
identity cutoff is not ideal because different proteins may evolve at very different rates. We derived
sequence similarity cutoffs through comparisons between reference protein/exon sets to outgroups
whose evolutionary distance to the reference is expected to be larger than the target. These outgroups
were selected among the reference proteome sets.

We first selected one representative proteome for each taxonomic lineage (genus, family, order, class,
and phylum), preferring the reference proteome covering the largest number of human residues in the
alignments made by phmmer (see above) between every human proteome and each reference
proteome. For each pair of reference and target species, we found the lowest taxonomic rank at which
they belong to the same lineage. The representative proteomes belonging to any other lineage at this
                                                                                                                                                            14
rank are candidate outgroups. We went up the taxonomic rank from the shared lineage between the
reference and the target, and at each rank, we checked if there are candidate outgroups, until we
found such candidates and used them as outgroups.

For each reference-target pair, we aligned the reference exon set to the protein set of each outgroup
using commands like: $ mmseqs search [reference_exons] [outgroups_proteins] [output_prefix]
/tmp/mmseqs/ --start-sens 3 --sens-steps 2 -s 7 -a 1 --threads 28. We found the top hit for each
reference exon and computed 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 , where 𝑖𝑖 stands for an outgroup, and 𝑗𝑗 stands for a position
in the query (from the reference proteome). 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the blosum62 score between the query
residue and the hit residue at this position; if the a query position is aligned to a gap, we considered
𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 to be -2. For query exons without hit, all positions received 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 of -2. If there are
multiple outgroups, we gathered the 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 scores of different outgroups for each position,
𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑗𝑗 = 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) were used as the outgroup similarity score for a position, 𝑗𝑗.

The outgroup similarity scores (𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑗𝑗 ) were used to filter the alignments between the reference
proteome and sequence reads from a target species. For each alignment, we computed the cumulative
𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑗𝑗 over the aligned reference residues, and this cumulative score is used as a cutoff (𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂 )
to determine if this alignment should be kept. If the cumulative blosum62 score for this alignment is
lower than 0.95 ⋅ 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂 , we discarded this alignment. This procedure allowed us to discard low-
quality alignments between the reference and a target showing sequence similarity lower than between
this reference and outgroups.



Selecting reads with the highest similarity the reference proteins/exons
We wanted to choose reads with the highest sequence identity from a target species for each reference
exon or protein, similar to the reverse best hit strategy used in ortholog detection. However, two critical
adaptations are necessary for applying this strategy to unassembled reads. First, since each read
frequently covers part of a reference exon or protein, we can only compare reads covering the same
region. Second, highly similar reads originating from the same regions in a genome or transcriptome
must be merged to remove redundancy. We converted the pairwise alignments between a reference
exon or protein and reads of a target species mapped to it and passed the previous sequence similarity
filters into an MSA. The pairwise alignments were built by aligning the amino acid sequences, and we
replaced each amino acid with its corresponding codon to derive the alignment of nucleotide sequences.

We then introduced a 30 bp sliding window moving by one codon at a time to this MSA. Within a window,
we clustered all the 30 bp segments from reads into groups of similar sequences using the following
procedure. We ranked reads by their identity to the query from high to low. The first read initiated a
cluster. Subsequently, a new read was compared to the first sequence of each cluster and assigned to
the first cluster whose first sequence had no more than one mismatch from the current read. If a new
read could not be assigned to existing clusters, a new cluster was initiated with this read as the first
member.

Since most of the Chordata and Arthropoda genomes are diploid, we expect one or two clusters in each
window if the genome is homozygous or heterozygous in this window, respectively. More than two
clusters indicate contaminating reads from paralogous genes or other specimen contaminants such as
bacteria, or fungi during specimen collection or library preparation. Reads from paralogs will likely show
lower sequence identity to the reference exon; contaminations from other resources will likely show
much lower sequencing depth because randomly introduced gDNA contamination is not likely to be
                                                                                                                       15
more abundant than endogenous gDNA. Therefore, for each cluster (𝑖𝑖), we computed the number of
reads, 𝑁𝑁𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 (𝑖𝑖), in this cluster and the average number of mismatches to the query exon, 𝐶𝐶𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚ℎ (𝑖𝑖).
We considered a cluster to be good if (1) its 𝑁𝑁𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 (𝑖𝑖) was at least half of 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑁𝑁𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 (𝑖𝑖)) among all
clusters; (2) its 𝐶𝐶𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚ℎ (𝑖𝑖) was no larger than 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝐶𝐶𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚ℎ (𝑖𝑖)) + 2 among all clusters.

If the number of "good clusters" was no more than two, we marked the reads not included in the "good
clusters" as bad; otherwise, we marked all reads as bad. We discarded reads that were marked as bad.
We used the fraction of bad reads aligned to a reference protein to indicate whether this reference
protein is problematic or difficult to assemble from reads. If such a fraction is above 25%, we discarded
this reference protein and all the reads aligned to it. After all these filters, the dominant nucleotide
showing the highest frequency at each position in the MSA of reference exon or protein was used to
construct the coding sequence from the target species. If such a dominant nucleotide did not exist, we
replaced that position with a gap. The exon sequences were further translated to amino acid sequences,
and sequences of exons from the same protein were concatenated to obtain the protein sequence of
each target species.




M2.5 Stage5: generating multiple sequence alignments for human proteins
We gathered candidate orthologs of each human protein assembled from draft genomes and
sequencing reads. We aligned each query human protein to its candidate orthologs using HMMER (76).
We used four rounds of iterative HMMER searches with e-value cutoffs (--incE option) of 1e-10, 1e-7,
1e-4, and 1e-1 and bitscore cutoffs (-T option) of 0.75𝐿𝐿, 0.5𝐿𝐿, 0.25𝐿𝐿, and 0, where 𝐿𝐿 is the length of the
query human protein. Homologs found in each round of sequence search were used to construct the
sequence profile for each query human protein using HMMER hmmbuild, which was used to align more
homologs in the next round. HMMER also has the tendency to split the alignment between a query and
a hit protein into multiple HSPs. We compared multiple HSPs and merged pairs of HSPs if they satisfied
the following criteria: 1) overlap in covered query residues by both HSPs is smaller than half of their
coverage in the query; 2) overlap in covered hit residues by both HSPs is smaller than half of their
coverage in the hit; 3) merging the two HSPs can extend the query coverage by both HSP by at least
20 residues. If two HSPs should be merged, in their overlapping region, we chose the one displaying
higher sequence similarity (measured by total blosum62 scores) between the query and the hit. This
HSP merging routine could combine several HSPs into one alignment between the query and a hit, and
if there were more than one merged alignment for a hit, the one showing a higher total blosum62 score
was kept.

We obtained the MSA for each query protein, and selected the best hit from each source (either a draft
genome or a SRA dataset, labeled by its NCBI accession). We first identified the set of sources with a
clear single best hit to the human query by the following criteria: 1) this hit is aligned to >50% of query
residues; 2) this hit is the best hit, showing the highest total blosum62 score, 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 , among hits
from this source; 3) other hits from this source either show total blosum62 score lower than
0.8 ⋅ 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 or show higher than 95% sequence identity to the best hit among positions in the MSA
covered by both this hit and the best hit. Using these single best hits, we obtained a sequence profile
(with frequency of each amino acid at each position) for the query protein. Using the sequence profile,
we then scored the hits from sources without clear single best hits. We focused on hits aligned to at
least 30 query residues and showing query coverage higher than the maximal coverage of each source,


                                                                                                                      16
and we then selected the hit showing the highest score to the sequence profile based on the blosum62
matrix.

After the previous step, the MSA for each human protein contained the best single hit from each source.
We were concerned that the sequences assembled from SRA reads might contain a large fraction of
gaps due to the low sequencing depth of some species or show low sequence identity to the query
because non-orthologous reads were included. Therefore, we filtered these MSAs to remove such
sequences. For each source (𝑖𝑖) in a MSA, we computed the query coverage (𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖 ) and average
blosum score over aligned positions (𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 ). We calculated the 10% quantile of 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖 for hit sequences
originated from draft genomes (not SRA reads) in each phylum and class, i.e., 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄10𝑝𝑝ℎ and 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄10𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 .
Similarly, we calculated the 10% quantile of 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 for hit sequences originated from draft genomes (not
SRA reads) in each phylum and class, i.e., 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆10𝑝𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑦 and 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆10𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 . We discarded hits that
originated from the SRA reads if they showed worse quality than the hits from draft genomes in the
same class or phylum by the following criteria: 1) 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖 < 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄10𝑝𝑝ℎ , 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄10𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ) or 2) 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 <
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆10𝑝𝑝ℎ , 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆10𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 ). Such filters removed 38% of sequences that originated from SRA reads.

The human proteome contains a large fraction of intrinsically disordered and poorly conserved regions.
Finding and aligning the orthologous sequences for such regions is challenging, especially in species
with large evolutionary distances from humans, because these regions are frequently tolerant to
insertions and deletions and show compositional biases. We first identified conserved sequence
domains and globular structural domains in the query human proteins based on sequence domains
annotated in the InterPro database and structural domains we previously detected from AF2 models of
these proteins based on DPAM (36).

We then analyzed the filtered MSAs from the previous steps to identify poorly conserved IDRs. We
calculated the fraction of non-gap residues (𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖 ) and average blosum62 scores (𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖 ) for
each position in Chordata sequences. For each human protein with sequence or structure domains, we
calculated the 25% quantile of 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖 and 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖 (based on the Chordata sequences) of the
residues belonging to these domains, which we denoted as 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺25𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 and 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴25𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 . We then
analyzed the non-domain regions using a sliding window of 10 residues: if the average 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖 is
above 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺25𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 and the average 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖 is above 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴25𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 , we considered this window to
be a relatively conserved IDR. For human proteins without sequence or structure domains, we
considered a 10-residue window to be relatively conserved if its average 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖 and 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖 are
both above the 25% quantile of these values among the conserved IDRs from proteins with domains.
Neighboring relatively conserved IDR windows in sequence space were merged if there were less than
5 residues in between, and the merged segments were considered as inter-domain conserved motifs.

We hypothesized that excluding positions from IDRs that are poorly conserved even (expected to be
even less conserved in other lineages) from the MSAs of human proteins may reduce the noise in our
MSAs due to poor quality of alignments in such regions, leading to superior performance in
distinguishing true PPIs from false ones. However, excluding these residues might remove some motifs
mediating PPIs, and leading to decreased performance. Thus, we tested the performance of various AI
tools in distinguishing the positive control set from the negative control set based on the full MSAs and
MSAs without such poorly conserved IDRs. We found that removing poorly conserved IDRs resulted in
better performance for most tools (Figure S8), and thus we discarded these regions from our MSAs
and only used the remaining conserved or structured regions in our proteome-wide PPI screen.




                                                                                                                      17
     Figure S8. Removing poorly conserved intrinsically disordered regions (pcIDR) from
    sequence alignments improves the performance of different tools in distinguishing true
                                  PPIs from false ones.




M3. Preparing training datasets for PPI prediction
The interacting chains from the PDB (PPI set) were used to train RoseTTAFold2 (RF2) (12) and
AlphaFold-multimer (AFmm) (31) to improve their ability in modeling 3D structures of protein complexes.
However, one drawback of the PPI set is its small size; after clustering at 30% sequence identity
(MMseqs: --min-seq-id 0.3, -c 0.8), the PPI set used to train RF2 contains less than 20,000 clusters. It
was shown that using larger distilled datasets, e.g., AF2 models for a diverse set of proteins, has
significantly improved the performance of AF2 (11) and RF2. We therefore wondered whether we can
improve the performance of RF2-PPI in PPI prediction by enlarging the training dataset with predicted
3D structures of protein complexes. However, confidently predicted protein complexes by these state-
of-the-art methods are rare. Instead, AF2 models in AFDB contain a large number of interacting
domains. These domains are the evolutionary and structure units (79, 80), and they are recombined in
evolution to constitute proteins to perform specific functions (81, 82). We reasoned that the interactions
between these domains should resemble the interaction between proteins (35), and thus, a dataset of
                                                                                                       18
domain-domain interactions (DDI) derived from AFDB models (DDI set) might be useful to develop AI
networks for modeling protein complexes and predicting true PPIs among random protein pairs.




M3.1 Pairs of interacting proteins derived from protein complexes in PDB
The PPI set used to train the latest RF2 was derived from PDB entries released prior to Aug 2021. We
updated this dataset to include PDB entries of complexes released before January, 2024 using a
pipeline shown in Figure S9. We downloaded PDB entries in the mmcif format and focused on 130,389
entries with more than one polypeptide chain. We extracted biological assemblies from each PDB entry.
Within each biological assembly, we detected interacting chain pairs satisfying the following criteria: (1)
both chains have more than 30 residues, (2) more than 5 residues from both chains are interacting with
(minimal distance < 8Å) residues from the other chains. As a result, we identified a total of 840,090
interacting chain pairs.

We compared the sequences of these interacting chain pairs and considered pairs with high sequence
similarity (identity > 90%; query or hit coverage > 90% by MMseqs) as homodimers. We further filtered
the remaining 484,716 hetero-dimers using two criteria: (1) both chains should be from the same
organism (with the same TaxID); (2) they belong to PDB entries determined by X-ray crystallography
or Cryo-EM with resolution below 5Å; (3) the fraction of unassigned residues (UNK) and non-standard




 Figure S9. The procedure to prepare positive PPI training data from PDB protein complexes.

                                                                                                        19
amino acids in PDB ATOM record is less than 5% for both chains. As a result, we obtained 391,897
heterodimeric protein complexes, which we call the positive PPI set. We clustered single protein chains
in this set at 30% sequence identity cutoff using MMseqs (--min-seq-id 0.3 -c 0.8 --cov-mode 0); based
on these clusters of single chains, we further clustered the binary protein complexes by placing two
complexes, AB and A’B’, in the same cluster if A’ is in the same single-chain cluster as A and B’ is in
the same single-chain cluster as B. The updated positive PPI set contains 21,661 clusters. During
training, each cluster, instead of each case, is weighted equally to avoid overemphasizing large protein
families. Finally, because we focused on predicting the human interactome in this work, to avoid any
data leakage from experimentally determined human protein complexes in PDB, we excluded any pairs
where both PDB chains were close homologs of human proteins detectable by MMseqs (e-value <
0.00001, identity > 30%, and query or hit coverage > 50%), resulting in a total of 190,389 PPIs from
13,231 clusters. This dataset, named as the filtered positive PPI set, is the primary dataset used to
train AI networks in this study.




  Figure S10. The procedure to prepare the negative PPI training dataset by randomly pairing
              PDB chains that are NOT functionally related according to STRING.

In order to train an AI network to distinguish true interacting proteins from random pairs of proteins, we
also assembled a negative PPI dataset (Figure S10) by randomly pairing PDB chains from the positive
PPI set. These random pairs need to be from the same organism (according to TaxID) but show no
evidence of interaction. We analyzed the taxonomy information for PDB chains in the positive PPI set
and focused on 34,646 non-redundant PDB sequences from 56 taxa, where each taxon has more than
100 sequences. We mapped these sequences to entries in the STRING database using MMseqs,

                                                                                                       20
keeping the 31,724 sequences that can be mapped to closely related STRING sequences (query or hit
coverage > 0.8, identity > 80%). The STRING database focuses on genetic interactions, and it provides
information about functionally related protein pairs. Thus, mapping to STRING entries allowed us to
evaluate whether a pair of PDB chains represent proteins that are functionally related.

Next, we randomly selected candidate negative control pairs from each taxon, requiring the number of
such pairs in a taxon to be no more than twice of the number of pairs from this taxon in the positive
PPI set. As a result, 548,587 pairs were selected as candidates for negative controls, each from the
same source organism but different PDB entries. We considered a candidate pair to be functionally
related if they map to any functionally related pairs in STRING. If not a single pair they map to is
functionally related, we further check if the proteins they map to both have at least 5 other functionally
related proteins in STRING, indicating that their functional associations are well studied and the lack of
a functional interaction is not due to experimental challenges or low scientific interest. We considered
any pair fitting these criteria unlikely to interact and included it in our pool of negative controls. We found
329,824 PDB chain pairs that can be used as negative controls. Similar to what we did for the positive
PPI set, we clustered these pairs by placing pairs AB and A’B’ into the same cluster if (1) A belongs to
the same MMseqs cluster (--min-seq-id 0.3 -c 0.8 --cov-mode 0) as A’ and (2) B belongs to the same
MMseqs cluster as B’. The 329,824 negative control pairs represented 230,932 clusters, nearly 10 times
more than the number of clusters in the positive PPI set.

Because we mixed positive controls and negative controls at equal ratio to train our AI networks, having
too many negative control pairs is not useful. Thus, we downsampled the negative controls to obtain
100,000 clusters that contain 142,836 pairs. The non-standard amino acids and unassigned residues
in PDB complexes cannot be properly used in training DL networks that are constrained to the 20-amino
acid tokens; to prevent structures with a large fraction of such residues from interfering with training, we
removed pairs where either chain contains more than 5% of such residues. As a result, we obtained a
negative PPI set with 140,571 chain pairs from 98,434 clusters. Finally, we excluded any pairs where
both PDB chains were close homologs of human proteins detectable by MMseqs (e-value < 0.00001,
identity > 30%, and query or hit coverage > 50%), resulting in a total of 65,911 pairs from 52,815 clusters.
This dataset, named as the filtered negative PPI set, is the primary dataset used to train AI networks
in this study.




M3.2 DPAM-IPR: a Domain Parser for AF2 Models utilizing InterPRo data
To expand the training dataset, we utilized interacting domains from AF2 models in AFDB. We recently
developed a Domain Parser for AF2 Models (DPAM) (36). DPAM uses inter-residue distance matrices,
predicted aligned error (PAE) matrices, and homology to previously classified structural domains in the
Evolutionary Classification of protein Domains (ECOD (83), Figure S11) database to segment AF2
models domains. Integrating structural (distance and PAE matrices) and evolutionary evidence (ECOD
domains) allowed us to find domains representing the structural and evolutionary units of proteins. The
drawback of this pipeline is that it is time-consuming to find similar ECOD domains via sequence
(HHsuite (26)) and structure (Dali (84)) searches. To analyze the massive amount of AFDB models, we
needed a much faster tool. We therefore relied on homology evidence in the InterPro database (37).
This shortcut is possible because AFDB contains models of UniProt proteins, which are all annotated
with homologous domains from various databases in InterPro.


                                                                                                            21
Compared to the homologous structural domains in ECOD detected by the sensitive sequence profile
and structure comparisons, relying on domain annotations in the InterPro database has three potential
caveats. First, these domains are annotated by aligning single sequences to the sequence profiles in
various databases, an approach not as sensitive as HHsuite or Dali in detecting remote homology. As
a result, more domains might be missed based on such homology evidence. However, based on our
previous comparison of ECOD and Pfam (85) (one major database used by InterPro), the fraction of
missed domains should be below 10%. Given the massive scale of AFDB models, missing a small
fraction of domains will not prevent us from identifying a large number of interacting domains to train AI
networks. Second, domain classification hierarchies hosted by InterPro mostly consist of sequence-
based domains. Without knowing the 3D structures, such domains frequently lack accurate boundaries
and are particularly problematic when the evolutionary units consist of discontinuous segments in
sequence. We reason that such problems with sequence-based domains can be alleviated by
combining domains annotated by multiple resources in the InterPro database, as well as integrating the
InterPro domains with structural features (distances and PAEs). Third, we previously found that
sequence domains defined in the InterPro database sometimes contain multiple independent folding
units (structural domains). Failing to split such sequence domains into smaller units will reduce the
number of interacting domains we can find from AFDB models but will not jeopardize the quality of our
dataset of DDIs: the interactions of sequence domains consisting of multiple structural units probably
resemble PPIs even better.




   Figure S11. Evidence to parse an AF2 model into globular domains. (A) An example AF2
  model (UniProt accession: Q9ZFH0). (B) A PAE plot. (C) A inter-residue distance plot. (D) Similar
             sequences detected by HHsuite. (E) Similar structures detected by Dali.

Building on our experience developing DPAM, in this work, we developed a new method: DPAM-IPR
(IPR stands for InterPro) to segment AFDB models into evolutionary and functional units with more
precise domain boundaries. We created a benchmark set to evaluate the performance of DPAM-IPR
as we optimize its parameters. We took the proteins we previously analyzed using DPAM (36, 86). We
reasoned that splitting domains defined by DPAM should be penalized, but merging two DPAM-defined
domains should not be penalized because the conserved evolutionary units we want to find may contain
multiple DPAM domains. However, to prevent DPAM-IPR from under-splitting domains, we calibrated

                                                                                                       22
PDB entries. We reasoned that experimental constructs in PDB entries designed by experts should
include the complete functional and evolutionary units. Thus, we penalize against merging regions
included in the experimental constructs with those that were excluded. We mapped proteins previously
analyzed by DPAM to PDB entries by BLAST (87) (e-value < 0.00001) and identified hits that can be
nearly fully aligned to the query (unaligned residues at both termini < 10; total unaligned residues < 0.2
x hit length). We reasoned that the query region aligned to such a hit and the region not aligned should
belong to different domains; if both aligned and unaligned regions contain more than 100 residues, we
used such information to optimize DPAM-IPR parameters. As a result, 100,261 AFDB entries that were
1) previously analyzed by DPAM and 2) partially mapped to PDB chains were used as the DPAM-IPR
benchmark set.

From InterPro, we considered “Domains”, “Families”, and “Homologous superfamilies” as domains, and
we used domains annotated by PFAM, CATH-Gene3D, SSF, SMART, PROFILE, and CDD databases
as homology-based evidence for domain parsing. From the 100,261 DPAM-IPR benchmark proteins,
CATH-Gene3D, PFAM, SSF, PROFILE, SMART, and CDD annotated 197061, 180705, 151867,
104875, 97285, and 95886 domains, respectively. Because PROFILE, SMART, and CDD annotate far
fewer domains than other databases, we used the following four sources of homology evidence: CATH-
Gene3D domains, PFAM domains, SSF domains, and other domains (a merged set of PROFILE,
SMART, and CDD domains).

Similarly to DPAM, DPAM-IPR parses domains based on the probability that a given residue pair
belongs to the same domain, which we denoted as 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 . This probability is calculated as the weighted
geometric mean of probabilities for residue pairs to be in the same domain based on different types of
                                                             0.25      0.25      0.5
evidence. We used the following formula 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 = 𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷   ⋅ 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 ⋅ 𝑃𝑃𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 , where 𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 , 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 , and 𝑃𝑃𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻
are the same-domain probabilities according to inter-residue distance, PAE, and homology evidence.
𝑃𝑃𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 and 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 are calculated based on regression analysis of benchmark ECOD domains as described
in our DPAM paper (36). The weights (0.25, 0.25, and 0.5) in the above formula were not optimized but
place equal weight (0.25 + 0.25 and 0.5) on structural and homology evidence.

We analyzed how InterPro domain annotations should be converted to 𝑃𝑃𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 . Based on each of the
four sources of homology evidence mentioned above, residue pairs in a protein may be in three
categories: 1) belonging to the same domain, 2) belonging to different domains, and 3) the rest, i.e.,
including residues not assigned to any domain. We wondered how these states could be converted to
𝑃𝑃𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 . We partitioned residue pairs in proteins from the DPAM-IPR benchmark set into categories
according to the four sources of homology evidence. We estimated the expected 𝑃𝑃𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 for each
category as the fraction of residue pairs in this category that belong to the same domains according to
DPAM, and the results are shown in Table S2. As expected, 𝑃𝑃𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻𝐻 for a pair of residues is positively
correlated with the number of databases that suggest to be in the same domain.

                  Table S2. Converting homology evidence to same-domain probability.
       PFAM      CATHGENE3D        SSF      OTHERS       Prob           PFAM      CATHGENE3D         SSF       OTHERS       Prob
        rest        same          same        same      0.915          same          same          different    rest   0.405
      same          same           rest        rest     0.885            rest          rest         same different 0.368
        rest         rest         same        same      0.885          same         different       same        rest   0.362
      same          same          same        same      0.874         different        rest         same        rest   0.339
      same           rest         same        same      0.864          same            rest        different    rest   0.333
        rest        same           rest       same      0.844          same            rest           rest   different 0.316
     different      same           rest       same      0.836            rest       different       same different 0.31

                                                                                                                                    23
      same         same         same      rest        0.835       different     different     same      same 0.301
       rest        same        different same         0.832          rest       different    different same       0.3
       rest        same         same different        0.823          rest        same           rest   different 0.291
      same          rest          rest   same         0.816       different     different       rest    same 0.264
      same         same          rest       same      0.813       different     different      same        rest      0.26
       rest         rest         rest       same      0.803         same        different       rest      same       0.252
       rest        same         same         rest     0.798       different       rest         same      different   0.25
      same          rest       different    same      0.784          rest         rest          rest       rest      0.237
     different     same         same        same      0.774         same        different       rest       rest      0.229
       rest        same          rest        rest     0.768         same          rest         same      different 0.202
      same         same        different    same      0.754       different     different      same      different 0.175
       rest       different     same        same      0.738         same        different      same      different   0.17
     different      rest        same        same      0.698         same          rest       different different 0.145
     different      rest         rest       same      0.687         same        different       rest     different 0.138
     different     same         same       different 0.684        different       rest          rest       rest      0.138
     different     same          rest      different 0.683        different     different    different    same       0.136
      same         same         same       different 0.682           rest       different       rest       rest      0.101
     different     same         same         rest     0.675          rest         rest       different     rest      0.101
      same         same          rest      different 0.658           rest         rest          rest     different 0.092
     different     same          rest        rest     0.657       different       rest          rest     different   0.09
     different     same        different    same      0.635       different       rest       different     rest      0.084
     different      rest       different    same      0.633          rest         rest       different different     0.08
        rest       same        different different    0.604          rest       different    different      rest     0.077
      same           rest         rest      rest      0.604       different        rest      different   different   0.075
      same         same        different different    0.567        same         different    different      rest     0.071
        rest         rest       same        rest      0.566        same         different    different    same       0.059
        rest       same        different    rest      0.566       different     different       rest        rest     0.059
      same        different     same      same        0.563          rest       different       rest     different   0.051
        rest      different       rest    same        0.506       different     different    different      rest     0.047
        rest         rest      different same          0.5         same         different    different   different   0.044
     different     same        different    rest      0.496          rest       different    different   different   0.044
      same           rest       same        rest      0.486       different     different       rest     different   0.029
     different     same        different different    0.466       different     different    different   different   0.026
        rest      different     same        rest      0.411


Similar to DPAM, DPAM-IPR partitioned residues into domains by agglomerative clustering, grouping
residues with high 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 into the same domains. Briefly, we partitioned residues in a protein into non-
overlapping and consecutive segments of 5 residues. We computed the average 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 for every pair
of segments. Initially, each 5-residue segment is treated as a candidate domain. Then, we sorted
segment pairs reversely by 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 ; we iterated through the list of segment pairs and progressively
merged candidate domains linked by a pair of segments satisfying the following criteria: 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖_𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 ⋅
𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑀𝑀 ≥ 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖1_𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 , 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖2_𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 ) and 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 > 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑃𝑃 . In the above formula,
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖1_𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 is the average 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 for segment pairs within the first candidate domain; 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖2_𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 is
the average 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 for segment pairs within the second candidate domains; 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖_𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 is the average


                                                                                                                             24
𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 for segment pairs between the two candidate domains; 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑃𝑃 and 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑀𝑀 are two parameters
to be optimized.

Using the DPAM-IPR benchmark set, we performed a grid search to find the optimal 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑃𝑃 and
𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑀𝑀 . Proteins in this set were, on the one hand, segmented into structural domains by DPAM. On
the other hand, at least a part of each protein was used in an experimental construct to solve a 3D
structure. We reasoned that DPAM domains define the minimal boundaries, whereas the experimental
constructs mark the maximal boundaries for the domains we want to find (Figure S12). Therefore, we
considered residue pairs in the same DPAM domain to be true same-domain pairs; we considered a
residue within an experimental construct and another residue outside this construct as true different-
domain pairs. For 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑃𝑃 in the range of 0.2–0.8 (grid size: 0.1) and 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑀𝑀 in the range of 1.0–2.0
(grid size: 0.1), we computed the fraction of true same-domain residue pairs correctly predicted by
DPAM-IPR (true positive rate, TPR) and the fraction of true different-domain residue pairs correctly
predicted by DPAM-IPR (true negative rate, TNR). We chose the 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑃𝑃 and 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑀𝑀 values that
resulted in the highest sum of TPR and TNR, i.e., 0.4 and 1.6.
After agglomerative clustering, we kept domains with at least 30 residues, and we further refined the




     Figure S12. Rationale to use the DPAM-IPR benchmark set for parameter optimization.
     DPAM domains define the minimal boundaries while the experimental constructs define the
     maximal boundaries. Shrinking DPAM domains or extending experimental constructs will be
   penalized, while extending DPAM domains or shrinking experimental constructs will be tolerated.

boundaries of these domains. We attempted to shorten or extend each domain’s boundary based on
the contacts of each residue (other residues that are less than 6Å away in 3D space but more than 6
residues away in sequence) in this domain. If a residue at the domain boundary had more contacts out
of this domain than within this domain, we excluded it; in contrast, we added a residue to extend the
domain boundary if it had more contacts with residues within this domain than those outside this domain.
Starting from residues at both ends of a domain, we repeated this procedure until no residues were
removed or added.




                                                                                                                 25
M3.3 Pairs of interacting domains derived from multi-domain AFDB models
Equipped with DPAM-IPR, we set out to identify interacting domains from AFDB models (Figure S13).
We      downloaded       the    pre-clustered    AFDB50   set    from    the    Steinegger   lab     at:
https://foldseek.steineggerlab.workers.dev/afdb50.tar.gz, which contains 53.7M models. We
downloaded the archived InterPro data released around the same time as most of the AFDB models,
from which we extracted “Domains”, “Families”, and “Homologous superfamilies” in these proteins
annotated by PFAM, CATH-Gene3D, SSF, SMART, PROFILE, and CDD databases. We found 12.4M
multiple domain proteins that contain at least two domains whose overlap is less than half the size of
either domain. We applied DPAM-IPR to parse these 12.4M AFDB models into domains, resulting in
28.4M domains. We identified inter-residue contacts within each protein using the following criteria: 1)
separated by at least 6 residues in between and 2) with minimal inter-residue distance < 6Å. We found
1.6M pairs of interacting domains using the following criteria: 1) average PAE for residues in either
domain less than 8Å; 2) average PAE for residue pairs between the two domains less than 8Å; 3) more
than 25 inter-domain contacts; 4) the number of inter-domain contacts higher than the numbers for intra-
domain contacts in both domains. These criteria ensured that the 3D structures of both domains, as
well as their interactions, are confidently predicted.




   Figure S13. Our procedure to prepare a positive training dataset with interacting domains
                       extracted from multi-domain proteins in AFDB.

We were concerned that some of these domain pairs might belong to the same evolutionary units, and
their coevolutionary signals and interactions could be stronger than true PPIs. To remove such pairs,
we filtered the 1.6M domain pairs to keep only those mapping to separate InterPro domains. Specifically,

                                                                                                     26
for each pair of interacting DPAM-IPR domains, we required that 1) an InterPro domain show over 50%
overlap with the first domain and a 0% overlap with the second; 2) a different InterPro domain show 0%
overlap with the first domain and over 50% overlap with the second. Nearly 1M domain pairs passed
this filter.

To reduce the computation for building MSAs, we removed redundancy in them by clustering their
sequences and placing pairs AB and A’B’ into the same cluster if (1) A belongs to the same MMseqs
cluster (--min-seq-id 0.5 -c 0.8 --cov-mode 0) as A’ and (2) B belongs to the same MMseqs cluster as
B’. We selected one representative per cluster, resulting in 585,078 domain pairs in our positive DDI
set. We manually inspected several dozens of DDIs found by our procedure and found that they closely
resemble interactions between proteins (Figure S14). We clustered these DDIs into 237,919 clusters
at 30% sequence identity cutoff by placing pairs AB and A’B’ into the same cluster if (1) A belongs to
the same MMseqs cluster (--min-seq-id 0.3 -c 0.8 --cov-mode 0) as A’ and (2) B belongs to the same
MMseqs cluster as B’. We excluded any domain pairs where both domains were close homologs of
human proteins detectable by MMseqs (e-value < 0.00001, identity > 30%, and query or hit coverage >
50%), resulting in a total of 535,115 DDIs from 223,440 clusters. This dataset, named as the filtered
positive DDI set, is the primary dataset used to train AI networks in this study.




  Figure S14. Random examples of interacting domain pairs from AFDB models found by our
                                         pipeline.

We also assembled a negative DDI set (Figure S15) by randomly pairing domains from the positive
DDI set. Such random pairs need to be from the same organism but show no evidence of interacting.
We analyzed the taxonomy information for AFDB models in the positive DDI set and focused on
211,995 sequences from 502 taxa in this set, where each taxon has more than 100 sequences. We
mapped these sequences to entries in the STRING database using MMseqs, keeping only the 140,251
sequences (66%) that can be mapped to closely related STRING sequences (query or hit coverage >
0.75, identity > 50%). The STRING database focuses on genetic interactions, and it provides
information for functionally related protein pairs. We found 2.4M pairs of AFDB models from the same
taxa that are not functionally related (never mapping to genetically interacting protein pairs in STRING,
and each protein has at least 5 other genetically interacting partners). We clustered these domain pairs
as we did for the negative PPI set, and we randomly selected 240k clusters with 363,592 domain pairs
to use as the negative DDI set for AI model training. resulting in a total of 535,115 DDIs from 223,440
clusters. This dataset, named as the filtered positive DDI set, is the primary dataset used to train AI
networks in this study.



                                                                                                      27
     Figure S15. Our procedure to prepare a negative training dataset by randomly pairing
              functionally unrelated domains from the positive DDI training set.




M3.4 Preparing input data for the training datasets
For every entry in the training datasets, we prepared its paired MSA and 3D coordinates. For each
binary protein complex in the positive and negative PPI sets, we extracted the 3D coordinates of the
two chains from the corresponding PDB entries. For the positive and negative DDI set, we extracted
the coordinates for each domain pair from the corresponding AFDB models. The extracted 3D structures
for the positive PPI or DDI sets will be in the “bound conformation” determined in experimental
structures or predicted by AF2, and the relative distances and orientations between residues in the two
proteins/domains will be used to calculate the loss during training. In contrast, the two molecules in the
negative sets, extracted from different PDB entries or AF2 models, will have random relative positions
and orientations. This is not a problem because for the negative set, the distances between residues in
different molecules were always assumed to be in the largest distance bin, while the relative orientations
between residues in different molecules were not used.

Because many PDB chains (in the same or different PDB entries) have identical sequences, to save
time for multiple sequence alignment (MSA) construction, we merged identical sequences and obtained
a non-redundant set of protein sequences representing all PDB chains in the positive and negative
PPI set. Similarly, we also obtained a non-redundant set of protein pairs. We built MSA for each
sequence in the non-redundant set by searching against the UniRef30 database (obtained from
https://wwwuser.gwdg.de/~compbiol/uniclust/2023_02/) with HHblits (88) (-realign_max 100000 -
maxseq 1000000 -maxfilt 100000 -min_prefilter_hits 1000 -all). We found that the HHblits option “-all”
is important. By default, HHblits filters the output MSAs at 90% sequence identity; turning this option on
suppresses this behavior and allows all taxa to be present in the MSAs and more complete pairing of
                                                                                                       28
sequences from the same taxa to generate paired MSAs (pMSAs). We scored each hit in the output
MSA of HHblits by its similarity to the query, and this similarity is evaluated by the total blosum62 score
(89) of the aligned positions between the query and a hit. We selected a single hit showing the highest
similarity to the query from each taxon. We further constructed a pMSA for each protein pair in the non-
redundant set by concatenating sequences of the same taxa. We filtered the pMSAs by HHfilter (-id 95
-cov 50), and the resulting MSAs were used as inputs to train AI networks.

We built input MSAs for the positive and negative DDI sets in the same way, except that the “-all”
option for HHblits was disabled due to disk space constraints. This reduced the depth of pMSAs for the
DDI sets, but we reasoned that it might be beneficial for models to learn to work with shallower MSAs.
To replicate PPIs as much as possible in our positive DDI set made of domain pairs from the same
protein, we built MSAs for each domain separately and generated the pMSA in the same fashion as the
positive PPI set: instead of pairing domain sequences in the positive DDI set according to UniProt
accessions, we selected the closest hit to the query in each taxon and paired them by taxon.




M4. Developing Artificial Intelligence networks for PPI prediction
M4.1 Simplifying the RoseTTAFold2 network and performance evaluation
We started from the current RF2 network and made a number of changes to streamline its architecture
and speed up PPI prediction. First, we removed the 3D structure track. This was initially intended to
simplify the network, but we later found that a better performance for PPI prediction can be achieved
without the 3D structure track (see M4.2). Second, we reduced the number of attention-based blocks
to 12 and the number of recycles to 3. Third, we removed loss functions designed to evaluate the
accuracy of predicted 3D structures. In our final network, we only used loss functions for the following
predictions: 1) randomly masked residues in the input MSA (masked token prediction loss, weight 1.0),
2) the relative distances between residues (distogram prediction loss, weight 2.0), 3) the relative
orientations between residues (orientogram prediction loss, weight 2.0), and 4) disordered residues in
experimental structures (disorder prediction loss, weight 0.1). Fourth, we did not use any 3D structures
as templates because we found that using such templates in training decreases the network’s ability to
distinguish true PPIs from random pairs (see M4.2). Instead, we initialized the 2D pairwise features
from randomly generated coordinates. Fifth, we removed the code for handling symmetry, because we
always used a 1:1 stoichiometry for PPI screening. We previously explored whether including the
stoichiometry of obligate homo-oligomeric proteins in the process of PPI modeling by AF2 can improve
the success rate of identifying their interacting partners. We found that providing the correct homo-
oligomeric stoichiometry actually reduced the accuracy for PPI prediction, possibly due to that modeling
the homo-oligomers introduced additional complications for the AF2. Furthermore, modeling a complex
with stoichiometries other than 1:1 would greatly increase the inference time and required GPU memory.
Sixth, we revised the data loader for model training to process different types of training data
(monomers, PPIs, and DDIs). We named the revised network RF2-PPI, and we deposited this network
and the trained weights to GitHub at: https://github.com/CongLabCode/RoseTTAFold2-PPI and Zenodo
(10.5281/zenodo.15314316).


                                                                                                        29
In the process of training each PPI prediction network, we kept a small validation set consisting of 480
randomly selected cases from each of the following training datasets: monomers, positive PPIs, and
negative PPIs. The training/validation cases from each dataset were clustered at 30% sequence identity,
after selecting the validation cases, any other cases grouped into the same clusters as these validation
cases were excluded from the training dataset. This small validation set is used to monitor validation
losses together with the training losses, preventing overtraining.

In order to compare various versions of networks with different model architecture and training routine,
we further assembled a test set, which was also used to compare the performance between RF2-PPI
and other established tools. To build this test set, we randomly selected 3,000 positive control pairs
and 30,000 negative control pairs, and we required the cumulative length for two proteins in each
selected pair to be no more than 1650 residues, so that they can always fit into the memory (48GB) of
GPUs we have. We used these controls to monitor the performance of different versions of RF2-PPI.
We referred to these selected sets as the positive benchmark set and negative benchmark set.

We used precision and recall curves to evaluate RF2-PPI’s ability to distinguish the positive
benchmark set from the negative benchmark set. We converted RF2-PPI outputs (distograms of inter-
residue distances for residue pairs between two proteins) to the interaction probability between proteins
(see M5.3), and we ranked the protein pairs in the benchmark sets reversely by the interaction
probability and counted the numbers of true positives and false positives at each rank, allowing us to
obtain a precision and recall curve for performance evaluation. To represent the low signal-to-noise
ratio associated with de novo PPI screens, we down-weighted each positive PPI by a factor of 100.
Because we have 3,000 positives and 30,000 negatives, such down-weighting will represent a signal-
to-noise ratio of 1:1000 (3,000 / 100 : 30,000 = 1:1000). We compute precision and recall as:
                               𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 = 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 ⋅ 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 / (𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 ⋅ 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 + 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 ⋅ 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤),
                                                      𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 = 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇/𝑃𝑃,
where 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 = 0.01 and 𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 = 1. 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 and 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 are numbers of positive and negative controls, respectively,
above a threshold; 𝑃𝑃 is the total number of positive controls.




M4.2 Testing training dataset and model architectures
We studied the impact of three different types of training datasets, monomeric PDB chains, DDIs
(positive and negative), and PPIs (positive and negative) on training RF2-PPI to distinguish true human
PPIs from random pairs. We expected that the monomeric PDB chains (MONO set) are not as crucial
for our task as the DDI and PPI set, and thus, we relied on the training set for RF2 made of 1) single
chains from PDB entries released prior to Aug 2021 and 2) AF2 models for UniProt50 representatives.
The DDI and PPI training datasets were newly prepared for this study as described above. For both the
DDI and PPI sets, we mixed the interacting (positive) and non-interacting (negative) pairs at 1:1 ratio;
an equal ratio was chosen to ensure the network would not overpredict or under-predict PPIs. For the
MONO set, we took crops made of 256 continuous residues in the protein sequences. For the DDI or
PPI sets, we took crops made of 256 residues near the DDI or PPI interfaces.

We were concerned that a significant fraction of the PPI training set are pairs of human proteins, and
including them might appear to result in good performance due to information leakage. Therefore, we
first excluded human homologs from the PPI set (see M4.1), and tested whether training RF2-PPI with
the entire PPI set and the filtered PPI set show different performance in distinguishing true human

                                                                                                       30
PPIs from false ones. We used 12,800 training examples per epoch and randomly sampled 1 example
per cluster. After training for 60 epochs, we found that the two training sets did not result in much
difference in RF2-PPI’s performance (Figure S16), suggesting that the ability for RF2-PPI to distinguish
true PPIs from random pair is not a result of memorizing the training data. Instead, such a network can
learn the fundamental rules about residue-residue interaction, protein folding, and coevolution. Although
this analysis suggested that information leakage will not be a problem in training RF2-PPI, we still relied
on the filtered PPI sets in our study.




      Figure S16. Precision versus recall curves for RF2-ppi trained by the entire PPI sets
    (positive: negative = 1:1) or the filtered PPI sets (positive: negative = 1:1) where pairs of
                             human protein homologs were removed.




   Figure S17. Precision versus recall curves for RF2-ppi trained with different datasets and
                              their combinations for 60 epochs.

We next tested the performance of different training datasets and their combinations, including 1) the
MONO set, 2) the DDI set, 3) the PPI set, 4) the MONO and DDI sets mixed at equal ratios, 5) the
MONO and PPI sets mixed at equal ratios, 6) the DDI and PPI sets mixed at equal ratios, 7) the MONO,
DDI, and PPI sets mixed at equal ratios. After 60 epochs, the performance of RF2-PPI trained with
different datasets is shown in Figure S17. RF2-PPI showed terrible performance when training with the
                                                                                                        31
MONO set alone, because such training increased RF2-PPI’s tendency to predict a high interaction
probability for non-interacting pairs as well. It is worth noting that the poor performance of the MONO
set could be related to the fact that we took continuous crops of 256 residues, so the model mostly saw
interactions within domains. If we also took discontinuous crops from the MONO set, we might reach
better performance by training with the MONO set alone. The DDI set alone showed better performance
than the PPI set, and the best performance was achieved when the DDI set was combined with the PPI
set (red curve in Figure S17), the MONO set (green curve in Figure S17), or both of them (lime curve
in Figure S17).
We tested various modifications to the RF2-PPI architecture to improve its performance. We tried to
add the 3D structure track and the loss functions associated with 3D structure prediction accuracy,
resulting in a network similar to RF2-lite (18), a simplified version of RF2 with 8 attention-based blocks
instead of 36 for full RF2. We recently used RF2-lite to identify PPIs in bacterial pathogens (13).
Surprisingly, the addition of 3D structures to the network decreased its performance regardless of what
training datasets were used (Figure S18). Similarly, RF2-lite (black curve in Figure S18) shows worse
performance than RF2-PPI without the 3D structure track. RF2-lite also shows worse performance than
the RF2-PPI network with 3D features (RF2-PPI+3D) trained on the combination of the MONO, DDI,
and PPI sets for 60 epochs. RF2-lite was trained for 300 epochs on the exact MONO set and an older
version of PPI set (without removal of human homologs). The superior performance of RF2-PPI+3D
trained with much fewer epochs also demonstrates the power of the DDI training set.




     Figure S18. Adding 3D structure features to RF2-ppi decreases its performance after
                         training on various datasets for 60 epochs.

After 60 epochs, it was not clear whether or not the addition of the PPI set to the combination of MONO
and DDI sets would result in a better RF2-PPI network. With a 3D structure track, adding the PPI set
on top of the MONO and DDI sets clearly improved its performance; however, we observed a slightly
opposite trend for RF2-PPI without 3D structure features. We thus continued to train RF2-PPI without
a 3D structure track for more epochs, and we found that in later epochs, training with the combination
of MONO, DDI, and PPI sets showed better performance than training with the combination of MONO
and DDI sets. We therefore chose to focus on the combination of all three sets for further explorations.
We tested whether changing other hyperparameters of the RF2-PPI network would improve its
performance, such as a larger crop size, a larger number of sequences in the seed MSA, and a larger
number of sequences in the extended MSA. While these modifications significantly increased the time

                                                                                                       32
required for training and inference, they did not show visible improvement over the original crop size
(256), seed MSA depth (128), and extended MSA depth (1024) that we inherited from RF2. Thus we
did not change these parameters.

We also tested if directly predicting whether two proteins or domains should interact and adding a loss
function for that (PPI loss) would help RF2-PPI to distinguish true interactions from false ones. We
made such predictions based on the maximal interaction probabilities for residues between two
molecules, and the inter-residue interaction probabilities based on the sum of probabilities for distogram
bins below 12Å. We started with the RF2-PPI network trained without the PPI loss for 80 epochs, added
PPI loss at different weights, and resumed the training. We found that adding a PPI loss significantly
reduced the performance of RF2-PPI (Figure S19) in distinguishing true interactions from false ones at
a signal-to-noise ratio of 1:1000. This is likely related to the fact that we trained the network at a signal-
to-noise ratio of 1:1, and adding the PPI loss pushed the network to adapt to this much higher signal-
to-noise ratio, making it less suitable for de novo PPI screens at very low signal-to-noise ratio.




    Figure S19. Directly predicting whether two proteins/domains interact and adding a loss
     function for that decrease the performance of RF2-ppi. Using the monomer structures
    during training and inference also decreases the performance of RF2-ppi (purple curve).

We wondered whether providing the monomeric structures of potential interacting partners would help
RF2-PPI to distinguish them from random pairs. During training, we extracted the monomer structures
from the complex structure (i.e. bound confirmation) for each interacting protein/domain pair to initialize
the pairwise features, i.e. distance and relative angles between residues features (distograms and
orientograms) within each protein/domain. During validation, we used the predicted 3D structures of
individual human proteins in AFDB to initialize the pairwise features. However, this attempt resulted in
worse performance (purple curve in Figure S19). The lack of success is possibly related to the fact that
we used the “bound conformations” for monomers during training, significantly simplifying the task for
the AI network. Furthermore, in real applications, such bound conformations are not available and so
providing these during training may bias the network against unbound conformations of the monomers.
We continued to train the RF2-PPI network with the combination of MONO, DDI, and PPI sets for more
epochs. We found the performance stopped improving after 140 epochs, and thus we took the model
at 140 epochs as our final model (Figure S20).




                                                                                                           33
       Figure S20. Performance of RF2-ppi as a function of the number of training epochs.




M5. Developing a hierarchical PPI prediction pipeline
M5.1 Preparing proteins for PPI screening
We focused on domains and conserved motifs in the inter-domain linkers in our screen because we
found that inclusion of poorly conserved inter-domain linkers decreases PPI screen accuracy (see
Figure S8 in M2.5). We referred to the regions included in our PPI screen as elements for simplicity.
Our ability to model large protein complexes is limited by the memory of available GPUs. Thus, we
attempted to split larger proteins into segments with minimal inter-segment contacts and flexible relative
orientations. To do this, we first calculated the cumulative length of elements in each protein. If the
cumulative length is less than 750 residues, we do not attempt to split a protein into segments.
Otherwise, we obtained the three parameters between pairs of elements in a protein, including, the total
number of inter-element contacts (separated by at least 10 residues in sequence and inter-residue
distance < 8Å in 3D space), i.e., 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁, the minimal length of the two elements (𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿), and the
average PAE of residues between elements ( 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 ). We merged pairs of elements if
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 / 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 + 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 / 100 > 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 / 8, indicating the two elements have a large number of
residue-residue contacts or their relative orientation, reflected by 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴, is not flexible. We attempted
to split long proteins into 2-4 segments and avoid splitting elements while ensuring that the cumulative
length of elements in each segment remains below 750 residues.

We excluded 732 proteins that cannot be split into shorter (<750 aa) segments. We collected residues
belonging to domains or conserved motifs in each segment, and these were the residues to be modeled
in our PPI screens. These residues are not always continuous in sequence due to the exclusion of
poorly conserved IDRs, and we filled gaps that were 10 residues or less. We obtained a total of 21,127
segments, and they represent 19,528 (95%) human proteins and constitute 191 million pairs. It is worth
noting that because many large proteins can be split into several smaller segments with flexible relative

                                                                                                                       34
orientation, our cutoff of 750 aa allows most of the large proteins to enter our screening pipeline. The
distribution of size for proteins included in and excluded from our screen is shown in Figure S21A. An
example of a large protein that cannot be partitioned into smaller, independently folded segments—and
is therefore excluded from our PPI screening pipeline—is shown in Figure S21B. In contrast, another
large protein shown in Figure S21C, was split into multiple segments and included in our study.




  Figure S21. Most large proteins are included in our screen. (A) Distribution of size for proteins
   included in and excluded from our PPI screen. (B) An example large protein excluded from our
         screen. (C) An example large protein included in our screen as multiple segments.

The statistics of proteins and residues we removed from our PPI screening pipeline are summarized in
Figure S22. In total, 940 proteins were removed due to their large size, bringing the total to 19,564
proteins (95.4% of all human proteins). There are 9.53M residues in these proteins and 6.10M residues
(64%) belong to sequence domains annotated by InterPro or structure domains annotated using our
DPAM pipeline. In addition to these domains, we found inter-domain conserved motifs as described
above (see M2.5), and these motifs consist of another 0.76M residues (8%). We also included short
linkers (less than 10 residues) between domains and the inter-domain conserved motifs, adding another
0.25 M residues (3%) from inter-domain linkers. The remaining poorly conserved loops, consisting of
2.42M residues (25%), were excluded from our screen. 36 proteins are entirely made of such poorly
conserved loops, and they were thus discarded from our pipeline, resulting in a total of 19,528 proteins
being screened.




  Figure S22. Statistics for proteins excluded from the screen due to large size and residues
      excluded from the screen due to poor sequence conservation and lack of rigid 3D
                                           structures.

                                                                                                     35
Although the exclusion of poorly conserved inter-domain linkers increases the accuracy of our in silico
pipeline by reducing false positives, such exclusion might prevent us from identifying PPIs mediated by
these regions. To estimate the impact of such exclusion, we found close homologous (identity > 50%,
query or hit coverage > 80%) templates for human protein pairs (see M6.1), and detected interface
residues (distance to another protein < 6Å) in each templates. We considered a residue to be on the
PPI interface of a protein pair if it is on the interface of more than 25% of the PDB templates. As a result,
we found 486,620 interface residues for 8,624 protein pairs.

We analyzed the distribution of the interface residues among domains, the inter-domain linkers (loops)
included in our screen, and the loops excluded from our screen. We found that although the excluded
loops contain 25.4% of residues in human proteins (Figure S23A), only 4.9% of PPI interface residues
fall into these loops (Figure S23B). In contrast, while loops included in our screen contain 10.6% of
human residues, 6.2% of the PPI interface residues fall into these loops. This suggests that although
we only included a smaller fraction (10.6% / (10.6% + 25.4%) = 29.4%) of inter-domain linkers, they
contribute to more than half (6.2% / (6.2% + 4.9%) = 56%) of interactions mediated by inter-domain
linkers. It is worth mentioning that interactions mediated by the disordered regions could be weak,
flexible, or even non-specific, and such interactions are hard to resolve by both experimental methods
and our in silico screen. It is difficult to estimate what fraction of human PPIs are as such, and they likely
constitute a large fraction of true PPIs that are beyond the limitations of our method.




   Figure S23. Statistics of different regions in human proteins and their involvement in PPI.
    Fractions of residues in (A) the entire set of human proteins and (B) predicted PPI interfaces,
      categorized into three groups: (1) domains, (2) inter-domain linkers included in our screen
      (included_loops), and (3) inter-domain linkers excluded from the screen (excluded_loops).




M5.2 Prioritizing pairs based on subcellular localization information
To maximize the number of true PPIs we can detect with limited computer resources, we prioritized
human protein pairs based on their subcellular localization and strength of coevolution signals between
them. We downloaded metadata (in JSON format) of all human proteins from UniProt and extracted the
Uniprot keywords in the category of “cellular component” (CC). We considered protein pairs to be from
the same cellular locality if they share any CC keywords; we considered them to be from different
localities if they both have CC keywords but show no overlap; the rest contain proteins of unknown
locality. We found that confident PPIs from databases (UniProt, BioGRID, and STRING) tend to be from
the same subcellular localities (Table S3). For example, the 85.7% pairs in our positive control set
(confident PPIs from 3 databases) are from the same localities.

Therefore, prioritizing pairs in the same subcellular localities significantly reduced the scale of our
computation without a significant decrease in the number of true PPIs that can be detected. Among the

                                                                                                           36
191M pairs we sought to screen, we focused on the 53.8M (28.2%) pairs sharing CC keywords; the
majority of true PPIs to be are expected to be in this set. In addition, we screened the 57.4M pairs that
include proteins without any assigned CC keywords. Such poorly annotated entries likely correspond
to poorly characterized human proteins; connecting them to well-characterized interacting partners
could shed light on their function. In total, 111.2M (53.8M + 57.4M) protein pairs were selected based
on these subcellular locality filters.

         Table S3. Partitioning of protein pairs in different sets by subcellular localities.
                                   Same locality        Different localities     Unknown locality
 All protein pairs                 58.5M (28.4%)           85.9M (41.7%)           61.5M (29.8%)
 Pairs in our screen               53.8M (28.2%)           79.4M (41.7%)           57.4M (30.1%)
 Confident PPIs (3 databases)      3,419 (85.7%)             209 (5.2%)              360 (9.0%)
 Confident PPIs (2 databases)      18,461 (83.2%)           1,591 (7.2%)            2,132 (9.6%)
 Confident PPIs (1 database)      111,412 (67.4%)          31,439 (19.0%)          22,464 (13.6%)




M5.3 Prioritizing pairs based on coevolution signals
We previously implemented Direct Coupling Analysis (DCA)(90), a statistical method to detect
coevolution between positions in a MSA, using the Tensorflow framework. This implementation is 5
times faster than RF2-PPI when running on GPUs. Therefore, we used DCA to rapidly analyze pairs
selected by subcellular localization. We filtered the pMSA built from omicMSA at 90% sequence identity
using HHfilter (-id 90) (26). Filtered pMSA showed slightly better performance than the entire pMSA,
increased compute efficiency for DCA, and reduced the file size. We converted the filtered pMSA into
matrices made of integers (see the script below) to save space and stored thousands to tens of
thousands of matrices into the same file to avoid having too many files and confronting the file system.

 def parse_a3m(seqs): # seqs is a list of aligned sequences parsed from a fasta file.
     alphabet = np.array(list('ARNDCQEGHILKMFPSTWYV-'), dtype='|S1').view(np.uint8)
     seq_num = np.array([list(s) for s in seqs], dtype='|S1').view(np.uint8)
     for i in range(alphabet.shape[0]):
         seq_num[seq_num == alphabet[i]] = i
     seq_num[seq_num > 20] = 20
     return seq_num


We then applied DCA to matrices converted from pMSAs using the following script.

 import os, sys, time
 import numpy as np
 import tensorflow as tf

 def tf_cov(x,w=None):
     if w is None:
         num_points = tf.cast(tf.shape(x)[0], tf.float32) - 1
         x_mean = tf.reduce_mean(x, axis=0, keep_dims=True)
         x = (x - x_mean)
     else:
         num_points = tf.reduce_sum(w) - tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_mean(w))


                                                                                                      37
           x_mean = tf.reduce_sum(x * w[:, None], axis=0, keepdims=True) / num_points
           x = (x - x_mean) * tf.sqrt(w[:, None])
       return tf.matmul(tf.transpose(x), x)/num_points

 myinput = sys.argv[1]
 mygpu = sys.argv[2]
 os.environ['CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES'] = mygpu
 config = tf.ConfigProto(gpu_options = tf.GPUOptions(per_process_gpu_memory_fraction=0.95))
 config.gpu_options.allow_growth = True

 # each line contain first_ID, second_ID, first_length
 fp = open(myinput, 'r')
 pair2len1 = {}
 for line in fp:
     words = line.split()
     pair = words[0] + '__' + words[1]
     pair2len1[pair] = int(words[2])
 fp.close()

 npz = np.load(myinput + '.npz')
 with tf.Graph().as_default():
     x = tf.placeholder(tf.uint8,shape=(None,None),name='x')
     x_shape = tf.shape(x)
     x_nr = x_shape[0]
     x_nc = x_shape[1]
     x_ns = 21
     x_msa = tf.one_hot(x,x_ns)

       x_cutoff = tf.cast(x_nc,tf.float32) * 0.8
       x_pw = tf.tensordot(x_msa, x_msa, [[1,2], [1,2]])
       x_cut = x_pw > x_cutoff
       x_weights = 1.0/tf.reduce_sum(tf.cast(x_cut, dtype=tf.float32),-1)

       x_feat = tf.reshape(x_msa,(x_nr,x_nc*x_ns))
       x_c = tf_cov(x_feat,x_weights) + tf.eye(x_nc*x_ns)*4.5/tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_sum(x_weights))
       x_c_inv = tf.linalg.inv(x_c)
       x_w = tf.reshape(x_c_inv,(x_nc,x_ns,x_nc,x_ns))
       x_wi = tf.sqrt(tf.reduce_sum(tf.square(x_w[:,:-1,:,:-1]),(1,3))) * (1-tf.eye(x_nc))

       with tf.Session(config=config) as sess:
           results = {}
           for pair in npz.files:
               start_time = time.time()
               msa = np.copy(npz[pair])
               try:
                   wi = sess.run(x_wi,{x:msa})
                   results[pair] = wi[:len1, len1:].astype(np.float16)
               except tf.errors.ResourceExhaustedError as e:
                   pass
               end_time = time.time()
           np.savez_compressed(myoutput + '.npz', **results)


We then applied average product correction (APC) to the original DCA scores (𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 ) using the following
                                   𝑚𝑚=𝐿𝐿1
formula: 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 = 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 − (∑𝑚𝑚=1   𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑚𝑚 ) × (∑𝑛𝑛=𝐿𝐿1                  𝑚𝑚=𝐿𝐿1 𝑛𝑛=𝐿𝐿1
                                                           𝑛𝑛=1 𝑠𝑠𝑛𝑛,𝑗𝑗 ) / (∑𝑚𝑚=1 ∑𝑛𝑛=1 𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑚,𝑛𝑛 ), where 𝑚𝑚 and 𝑛𝑛 are residues in
                                                   𝑚𝑚=𝐿𝐿2
the first protein; 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 = 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 − (∑𝑚𝑚=1         𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑚𝑚 ) × (∑𝑛𝑛=𝐿𝐿2               𝑚𝑚=𝐿𝐿2 𝑛𝑛=𝐿𝐿2
                                                                          𝑛𝑛=1 𝑠𝑠𝑛𝑛,𝑗𝑗 ) / (∑𝑚𝑚=1 ∑𝑛𝑛=1 𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑚,𝑛𝑛 ) , where 𝑚𝑚 and 𝑛𝑛 are
                                                                        𝑚𝑚=𝐿𝐿2
residues in the second protein; 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 = 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 − (∑𝑚𝑚=1                 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑚𝑚 ) × (∑𝑛𝑛=𝐿𝐿1             𝑚𝑚=𝐿𝐿2 𝑛𝑛=𝐿𝐿1
                                                                                             𝑛𝑛=1 𝑠𝑠𝑛𝑛,𝑗𝑗 ) / (∑𝑚𝑚=1 ∑𝑛𝑛=1 𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑚,𝑛𝑛 ), where 𝑚𝑚
is any residue in the first protein and 𝑛𝑛 is any residue in the second protein. We derived the DCA score
for a pair of protein by 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 = 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 ), where 𝑖𝑖 is any residue in the first protein and 𝑗𝑗 is any
residue in the second protein.

                                                                                                                                          38
       Table S4. The ability for 𝑫𝑫𝑫𝑫𝑫𝑫𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷𝑷 to prioritize candidate PPIs from different sets.
     DCA      Negative Confident PPIs Confident PPIs Positive Positive controls Positive controls
    score     controls by 1 database by 2 databases controls (RF2-PPI > 0.9)      (AF2 > 0.9)
    > 0.8      0.002%       1.0%           2.2%        4.0%          6.3%              8.3%
    > 0.5       0.03%       1.5%           3.4%        6.1%         12.2%             12.7%
    > 0.3        1.8%       5.8%           8.5%       12.5%         28.7%             25.8%
    > 0.28       2.9%       8.1%          10.8%       14.9%         32.3%             29.3%
    > 0.26       4.3%      11.2%          14.2%       17.9%         37.2%             33.3%
    > 0.24       6.3%      15.2%          18.3%       22.6%         43.8%             38.8%
    > 0.22       8.9%      20.2%          23.9%       28.4%         51.5%             45.5%
    > 0.2       12.2%      26.1%          30.3%       34.1%         57.6%             51.5%
    > 0.18      16.3%      32.9%          38.3%       41.3%         64.1%             58.3%
    > 0.16      21.5%      40.9%          47.7%       49.6%         71.8%             67.0%
    > 0.14      27.9%      49.7%          57.8%       58.5%         79.8%             75.3%
    > 0.12      35.5%      58.7%          67.9%       68.0%         85.9%             82.1%
    > 0.1       44.3%      68.1%          77.5%       77.3%         90.4%             87.7%
    > 0.08      54.2%      77.1%          85.3%       85.3%         93.3%             91.3%
    > 0.06      65.0%      85.0%          91.4%       92.5%         98.7%             96.9%
    > 0.04      76.7%      91.4%          95.7%       96.0%         99.9%             99.1%
    > 0.02      88.2%      96.6%          98.4%       99.1%        100.0%            100.0%


We obtained 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 for all the 111.2M pairs selected based on subcellular localizations, and we
tested how 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 can distinguish protein pairs in the positive control set from those in the negative
control set (yellow cells in Table S4). A high 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 cutoff can significantly enrich the positive
controls over the negative controls. For example, while 4% of positive control pairs show 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
above 0.8, only 0.002% of negative control pairs show such a high score. However, a high 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
will exclude a sizable fraction of true interactions in the positive control set that can be detected by the
more accurate and more sensitive AI networks (green cells in Table S4). Therefore, we selected a low
cutoff of 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 > 0.12 to allow the majority (over 80%) of true interactions showing interaction
probability above 0.9 by RF2-PPI or AF2 to pass while greatly reducing the total number of pairs for
subsequent screening stages.




M5.4 Using RF2-PPI to identify PPIs
Our de novo proteome-wide screening pipeline selected 43.6M protein pairs after the subcellular
localization and coevolution (DCA) filters were applied. We were concerned that a remarkable fraction
of true PPIs would be lost due to these pre-filters. In addition, we reasoned that utilizing the extensive
prior knowledge about human PPIs should help us to obtain a more complete picture of the human
interactome. Therefore, we used both the functional (genetic) interactions from the STRING database
and physical interactions collected from STRING (physical), BioGRID, and UniProt to perform an
experiment-guided screen, adding all the pairs extracted from these databases (see M1) directly to PPI
prediction at this stage.

We filtered the pMSAs generated from omicMSAs at 90% sequence identity using HHfilter (-id 90),
which were used as inputs to RF2-PPI. RF2-PPI uses a matrix of residue indices as its input feature,
and we introduced a residue indexing gap of 200 residues between different chains/domains during

                                                                                                                   39
training. Similarly, we provided the length of the first protein to RF2-PPI, which will in turn, introduce a
200 residue index gap in the residue index matrix. RF2-PPI produces predicted probabilities for the Cß-
Cß distances between all pairs of residues 𝑖𝑖 and 𝑗𝑗 which are binned between 0-20Å. Residue-residue
contact probabilities were calculated as the sum of the probabilities for the distance bins under 12Å for
each 𝑖𝑖, 𝑗𝑗 residue pair (Figure S24A). For any given pair of proteins, the matrix (𝑀𝑀𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅2𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 ) of contact
probability is of the shape (𝐿𝐿1 + 𝐿𝐿2) by (𝐿𝐿1 + 𝐿𝐿2), where 𝐿𝐿1 and 𝐿𝐿2 are the length of the first and
second proteins, respectively. To investigate inter-protein contacts, we extracted the submatrix
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅2𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 = 𝑀𝑀𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅2𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 [: 𝐿𝐿1][𝐿𝐿1: 𝐿𝐿1 + 𝐿𝐿2] shown in the red box of Figure S24B.




  Figure S24. Illustration of our procedure to process the RF2-ppi or AF2 outputs. (A) The 3D
  matrix of dimension (L1 + L2) by (L1 + L2) by number of distance bins (37 for RF2-ppi binned by 2-
    20Å / 0.5Å). (B) The summed 2D matrix (d < 12Å) from panel A. The submatrix inside the red
   dashed line contains the contact probability for residues between two proteins. Minorly adapted
        from the supplemental material of our previous manuscript 10.1126/science.abm4805.

The previous DL network we used for PPI screening in yeast had a problem of overestimating the
interaction probability at the junction between two sequences. RF2-PPI does not suffer from this
problem. Nevertheless, in this work, we still excluded the last 10 residues from the first protein and the
first 10 residues from the second protein and computed 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀′𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅2𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 = 𝑀𝑀𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅2𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 [: 𝐿𝐿1 − 10][𝐿𝐿1 +
10: 𝐿𝐿1 + 𝐿𝐿2]. The highest residue-residue contact probability in this matrix 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀′𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅2𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 was used to as
the interaction probability (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 ) for a pair of proteins.

We studied how interaction probabilities from RF2-PPI can further enrich true PPIs while filtering out
random pairs. We tested various RF2-PPI interaction probability cutoffs and monitored the fraction of
protein pairs from different datasets that pass each cutoff (Table S5). A high interaction probability
cutoff can substantially enrich the positive controls over the negative controls. For example, while only
0.01% of the negative control pairs that passed our previous 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 filter show 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 above
0.95, only 21% of the positive control pairs show such a high score. A high 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 will miss a small
fraction of true interactions in the positive control set that can be detected by the slower and slightly
more accurate AF2 (green cells in Table S5). Balancing the available computational resources and the
recall of our screening pipeline, we chose a low cutoff of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 > 0.3 for our de novo screen, and a
lower cutoff of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 > 0.25 for pairs with previous experimental evidence for physical or genetic
interactions. These cutoffs select about 5% of pairs screened by RF2-PPI, while allowing the majority


                                                                                                                      40
(about 80%) of true interactions showing interaction probability above 0.9 by AF2 to progress to the
next stage.

             Table S5. The ability for RF2-PPI to distinguish true PPIs from false ones.
        RF2-PPI      Positive Confident PPIs Confident PPIs Negative controls Positive controls
    interaction prob controls by 1 database by 2 database     (DCA > 0.12)      (AF2 > 0.9)
          0.95-1      21.17%       6.52%         1.14%            0.01%            62.58%
         0.9-0.95     22.58%       7.14%         1.29%            0.04%            65.67%
         0.85-0.9     22.99%       7.61%         1.44%            0.07%            66.64%
         0.8-0.85     23.54%       8.03%         1.58%            0.11%            67.96%
         0.75-0.8     23.90%       8.45%         1.73%            0.15%            68.58%
         0.7-0.75     24.23%       8.76%         1.90%            0.22%            69.11%
         0.65-0.7     24.64%       9.12%         2.09%            0.30%            69.81%
         0.6-0.65     25.25%       9.55%         2.31%            0.42%            70.87%
         0.55-0.6     25.94%      10.14%         2.59%            0.58%            71.58%
         0.5-0.55     26.65%      10.80%         2.94%            0.79%            72.82%
         0.45-0.5     27.23%      11.60%         3.43%            1.13%            73.26%
         0.4-0.45     28.08%      12.63%         4.16%            1.65%            74.05%
         0.35-0.4     29.60%      14.20%         5.28%            2.54%            75.55%
         0.3-0.35     31.99%      16.54%         7.17%            4.17%            77.76%
         0.25-0.3     35.68%      20.84%        10.68%            7.41%            80.14%
         0.2-0.25     43.53%      29.14%        17.84%           14.42%            83.41%
          0.1-0.2     77.34%      64.79%        53.56%           49.36%            94.97%
           0-0.1     100.00%     100.00%       100.00%          100.00%           100.00%




M5.5 Using AF2, AFmm, and ColabFold for PPI modeling
We used AF2 to evaluate the probability of interaction for the ~2.2M protein pairs that passed our RF2-
PPI filter (see M5.4). AF2, when coupled with our omicMSA, still outperforms RF2-PPI. Therefore, to
resolve a more complete human proteome, we also applied AF2 to all the candidate physical
interactions we collected from UniProt, BioGRID, and STRING (physical) databases, resulting in a total
of ~3.1M protein pairs that were evaluated at this stage. For this large-scale screen, we only used AF2
model 3, which performed the best for complex structure prediction based on our previous benchmark
(14).

Similar to our previous studies (14, 17), we deployed AF2 to predict protein-protein complex structures
using pMSAs generated from our omicMSA filtered at 90% sequence identity. We added a 200 residue
gap between the residue indices of the first protein and the second protein, to allow two chains to move
freely in relative to each other during the modeling process. We disabled template searches in AF2 to
ensure existing protein complexes in the PDB do not bias our results. In line with our RF2-PPI interaction
score, we extracted the predicted distograms (probabilities for the Cß- Cß distances) from AF2, and
estimated the inter-residue contact probability as the sum of the probabilities for the distance bins under
12Å (Figure S24A). The highest inter-residue contact probability for residue pairs between the two
proteins (red box in Figure S24B) was used to as the interaction probability (𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴2𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 ) of this protein
pair.


                                                                                                                  41
In addition, we also exploited the ColabFold pipeline to model complex structures using the AF2 and
AFmm networks. We converted our filtered pMSA into a format compatible with ColabFold by adding
two names separated by tab and stripping white space characters (this is how the ColabFold pipeline
recognizes paired sequences) for each paired sequence in the pMSA. We obtained the docker image
of the ColabFold pipeline and used it to run AF2 network with the following command: $ apptainer run
--nv -B [absolute path to the colabfold_afweights folder]:/cache -B $(pwd):/work [absolute path to
colabfold_1.5.5-cuda12.2.2.sif] colabfold_batch --model-order 3,5,1,2,4 --num-models 5 --num-recycle
3 --save-all --model-type alphafold2_ptm [folder with input msas] [folder to store outputs]. Similarly, to
use the AFmm network via the ColabFold pipeline, we used the following command: apptainer run --nv
-B [absolute path to colabfold_afweights]:/cache -B $(pwd):/work [absolute path to colabfold_1.5.5-
cuda12.2.2.sif] colabfold_batch --model-order 3,5,1,2,4 --num-models 5 --num-recycle 3 --save-all --
model-type alphafold2_multimer_v3 [folder with input msas] [folder to store outputs]. Since the fine
details of the predicted complex structures are not crucial for this study, we used only three recycles
(instead of 20 recycles by default) of AFmm to considerably reduce compute time. We turned on the “-
-save-all” flag of ColabFold to output the intermediate matrices, which include the predicted distograms
that we used to derive inter-residue contact probabilities and the interaction probabilities between
protein pairs as described above. However, there is a drawback of turning on this flag; that is that the
volume of the output data is very large, requiring timely processing of the output data.




M5.6 Selecting the final set of predicted PPIs
In this study, we applied our pipeline onto eight datasets: 1) protein pairs sharing subcellular
localizations (keywords in the CC category), namely, the CCcom set; 2) pairs including proteins without
subcellular localization annotations, namely, the CCunk set; 3) pairs showing evidence of genetic
interactions according to the STRING database, namely, the GENETIC set; pairs showing evidence of
physical interactions according to 4) Uniprot, 5) STRING, and 6) BioGRID; 7) the confident subset
selected by STRING (combined score > 600); 8) the confident subset selected by BioGRID (MV set).

For the first two datasets, we applied a pipeline consists of DCA, RF2-PPI, and AF2; for the third dataset,
we applied pipeline made of RF2-PPI and AF2; for the last five dataset, we used both RF2-PPI and AF2
to evaluate all protein pairs. We reasoned that if RF2-PPI strongly supports the interaction between a
pair of proteins, the lack of support from AF2, especially since we only used a single model of AF2,
should not exclude this pair from our final dataset. Therefore, we have five possible computational
pipelines applied to different datasets:
    1) DCA (cutoff: 0.12) → RF2-PPI (cutoff: 0.3) → AF2
    2) DCA (cutoff: 0.12) → RF2-PPI
    3) RF2-PPI (cutoff: 0.25) → AF2
    4) RF2-PPI only
    5) AF2 only.
These datasets and their tailored screening pipelines constitute 16 strategies as summarized in Table
S6.

Next, we aimed to identify a method to estimate the accuracy of each strategy, and determine the cutoffs
that maintain a high precision to obtain a final set of predictions. In our previous studies, we estimated
the precision of predicted interactions in the final dataset based on the estimated precision of the
benchmark set. However, such an estimate assumes that the signal-to-noise ratio in the benchmark set

                                                                                                        42
represents that in a proteome-wide screen. However, given the number of true PPIs in humans (roughly
estimated to be between 74k and 200k (3)) is hard to estimate, the true signal-to-noise ratio in a de
novo PPI screen is also hard to estimate. In addition to the de novo screen, we also performed
knowledge-guided screens among candidate PPIs from various databases which should have
substantially lower signal-to-noise, further complicating accuracy estimation.

Inspired by the widely used false discovery rate (91) estimation in statistics, in this study, we opt to
estimate the precision by the following procedure. First, we estimate the fraction of protein pairs in the
negative control set that will pass our cutoffs in the PPI screen pipeline, which we denote as 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 .
Second, if a pipeline screened a total of 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 pairs, and in the worst possible scenario where all these
pairs do not interact, one would still expect 𝑁𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 = 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ⋅ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 pairs to pass the cutoffs. Third, if
the total number of PPIs predicted by a pipeline is 𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 , the difference between 𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 and 𝑁𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓
should correspond to the number of true predictions. Thus, we use the following equation to estimate
the precision of our screen: (𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 − 𝑁𝑁𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 ) / 𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 = 1 − 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ⋅ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 / 𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 .

The aforementioned estimate is accurate for our de novo screens starting from the CCcom and CCunk
because most protein pairs used as the inputs of this pipeline do not interact. Additionally, we screened
the entire set of 140 million negative control pairs (see M1) through our de novo screen pipeline (DCA
→RF2-PPI → AF 2), and thus we are able to compute an accurate es timate of 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 for this pipeline.
For knowledge-guided screens, the starting set contains a considerable rate of true PPIs, our method
will underestimate the precision in these applications. Additionally, because we skipped the DCA step
in knowledge-guided screen to maximize recall, we must estimate a 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 without a DCA filter.
Therefore, we introduced a randomly selected set of 200,000 negative control pairs to estimate the
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 of the “RF2-PPI (cutoff: 0.25) → AF 2”, the “RF2-PPI only”, and the “AF2 only” pipelines.

We next searched for the cutoffs that corresponded to our desired precision of 90% to select the
predicted PPIs from each strategy. As in our previous studies (14, 15), we noticed that some proteins
tend to have a large number of predicted PPIs and these proteins may represent a false positive hub
that shows a higher predicted interaction probability with any other proteins due to some intrinsic
property. For each strategy, we determined the criteria to identify and remove such false positive hubs:
first, we marked a protein as a candidate false positive hub for RF2-PPI or AF2 predictions if it showed
a predicted interaction probability above 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 with 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 other proteins based on RF2-PPI or
AF2; second, from the predicted set, we removed pairs that include such candidate false positive hub
proteins if the predicted interaction probability for this pair was below 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖ℎ , where 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖ℎ is a
higher cutoff to capture the most confident predictions regardless of candidate false positive hub
proteins. 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 , 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 , and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 are parameters that we optimized for each screening
strategy to maximize the number of predicted PPIs at a 90% precision. We performed grid searches of
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 (0.5 to 0.95, step size 0.5), 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 (5 to 100, step size 1), and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 (0.95 to 1, step
size 0.001) to find the optimal parameters for each strategy as listed in Table S6.

Based on these optimized parameters, we found the interaction probability cutoff corresponding to a
90% precision for different strategies. These cutoffs were then applied to the final filter (either RF2-PPI
or AF2) in each strategy. Due to the different initial signal-to-noise ratios of each dataset, the interaction
probability cutoffs vary between them. For de novo screens, a higher cutoff is needed to exclude the
dominating noise, while for knowledge-guided screens, the cutoffs for RF2-PPI or AF2 will be lower
because the experimental evidence has drastically reduced the initial noise level. We did not remove
hub proteins with excessive interactions for strategies starting with candidate physical interactions from
                                                                                                                                     43
PPI databases (UniProt, STRING physical, and BioGRID), because PPIs supported by both
experimental studies and our in silico methods are less likely to be false positives.

          Table S6. The cutoffs to select the final predicted set aiming at 90% precision.
                  Strategy                            RF2-PPI cutoff       False positive hub cutoffs*
       CCcom → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI                     0.994 (>1.0)               0.8; 26; 0.997
       CCunk → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI                     0.999 (>1.0)                 0.9; 21; 1
           GENETIC → RF2-PPI                           0.888 (>1.0)               0.8; 46; 0.967
             UniProt → RF2-PPI                         0.531 (0.898)                    na
   STRING physical (score > 700) → RF2-PPI             0.360 (0.970)                    na
          BioGRID mv → RF2-PPI                         0.451 (0.952)                    na
        STRING physical → RF2-PPI                      0.662 (0.998)                    na
            BioGRID → RF2-PPI                          0.749 (0.975)                    na
                                                        AF2 cutoff         False positive hub cutoffs*
   CCcom → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI(0.3) → AF2              0.941 (>1.0)                0.6; 31; 0.993
   CCunk → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI(0.3) → AF2              0.993 (>1.0)                  0.75; 36; 1
       GENETIC → RF2-PPI(0.25) → AF2                   0.853 (>1.0)                0.9; 13; 0.986
               UniProt → AF2                           0.770 (0.770)                     na
     STRING physical (score > 700) → AF2               0.615 (0.953)                     na
             BioGRID mv → AF2                          0.678 (0.779)                     na
           STRING physical → AF2                       0.867 (>1.0)                      na
               BioGRID → AF2                           0.897 (0.999)                     na
The numbers in parentheses are for tailored cutoffs for homologous pairs. A cutoff of “>1.0” means that this
pipeline cannot achieve the desirable precision even if the highest cutoff (1.0) was used. *False positive hub
cutoffs: the three values separated by “;” are 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 , 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 , and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 .


We noticed that the interacting probability for homologous pairs tends to be overestimated, especially
by RF2-PPI, which primarily relies on evolutionary signals rather than physical principles. This is
because homologs may exhibit coevolutionary signals due to inheritance from common ancestors and
similar structural and functional constraints. Filtering out such spurious false coevolutionary signals
might require stricter cutoffs and additional experimental data. We therefore assembled a separate
subset of 5,000 homologous pairs from the negative control set and used it to estimate each pipeline’s
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 for homologous pairs and to determine appropriate cutoffs for such pairs. We found that de
novo screens cannot identify true interactions between homologs to high precision (80% or 90%), but
high interaction probability coupled with previous experimental evidence can identify interacting
homologs with high confidence (see Table S6).

The set of high-confidence predicted PPIs from all different strategies were merged, resulting in 21,599
predictions at a precision of 90%. In an attempt to obtain a confident 3D model for all predicted PPIs,
the predicted PPIs supported by only RF2-PPI were subsequently modeled with 5 models of AF2 and
AFmm, respectively (see M6.2). If none of these 10 models for a predicted PPI showed a predicted
interaction probability above 0.6, we excluded this pair. A total of 3,750 pairs were excluded, which we
expect to further increase the precision of our predicted set. We generated a second set, namely, the
confidence set, of predictions targeting 80% precision, with lower score cutoffs (Table S7) and a similar
procedure. This set contains 29,257 pairs (the high-confidence set is a subset of the confidence set).




                                                                                                             44
          Table S7. The cutoffs to select additional predictions aiming at 80% precision.
                    Strategy                            RF2-PPI cutoff False positive hub cutoffs*
         CCcom → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI                     0.958 (>1.0)         0.8; 26; 0.997
         CCunk → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI                     0.996 (>1.0)           0.9; 21; 1
             GENETIC → RF2-PPI                           0.829 (>1.0)         0.8; 46; 0.967
               UniProt → RF2-PPI                         0.401 (0.738)              na
     STRING physical (score > 700) → RF2-PPI             0.253 (0.922)              na
            BioGRID mv → RF2-PPI                         0.326 (0.882)              na
          STRING physical → RF2-PPI                      0.487 (0.962)              na
              BioGRID → RF2-PPI                          0.586 (0.941)              na
                                                          AF2 cutoff       False positive hub cutoffs*
     CCcom → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI(0.3) → AF2              0.855 (>1.0)              0.6; 31; 0.993
     CCunk → DCA(0.12) → RF2-PPI(0.3) → AF2              0.974 (>1.0)                0.75; 36; 1
         GENETIC → RF2-PPI(0.25) → AF2                   0.779 (>1.0)              0.9; 13; 0.986
                 UniProt → AF2                           0.646 (0.646)                   na
       STRING physical (score > 700) → AF2               0.452 (0.452)                   na
               BioGRID mv → AF2                          0.525 (0.525)                   na
             STRING physical → AF2                       0.765 (0.826)                   na
                 BioGRID → AF2                           0.819 (0.819)                   na
The numbers in parentheses are for tailored cutoffs for homologous pairs. A cutoff of “>1.0” means that this
pipeline cannot achieve the desirable precision even if the highest cutoff (1.0) was used. *False positive hub
cutoffs: the three values separated by “;” are 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 , 𝑁𝑁𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 , and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 .

Our final set of high-confidence predictions comprises 17,849 (21,599 – 3,750) PPIs. Among them,
1,381 pairs are in the positive control set (3,988 in total), indicating a recall of 34.6% (1,381 / 3,988). It
is important to note that some pairs were missed by our pipeline because about 5% of large proteins
were excluded from our screen. If we consider only the 3,631 positive control pairs included in our
screen, the recall of our high-confidence set is 38.0% (1,381 / 3,631). However, estimating recall with
the positive control set may result in an overestimation of our performance. These positive controls,
considered as confident PPIs by three databases, likely consist of strong interactions that can be readily
detected in experimental studies; such strong interactions should also be easier to detect by our in silico
methods.

We also used confident PPIs from other PPI databases to estimate the recall of our method. Another
source of confident PPIs is protein pairs with orthologous templates in PDB. As detailed below (see
M6.1), we found 10,757 PPIs supported by PDB complexes, and 3,037 of them were in our high
confidence set, suggesting a recall of 28.2% (3,037 / 10,757). Out of the 68,761 confident physical
interactions extracted from the STRING database (total STRING score > 700, maximal 999), 7,294
were included in our high-confidence set, suggesting a recall of 10.6%. Similarly, out of the 77,147 PPIs
supported by multiple experiments from BioGRID, 5,765 were predicted by our pipeline, suggesting a
recall of 7.5%. However, some confident PPIs supported by STRING or BioGRID could be false
positives, and considering them as gold standards might underestimate the recall of our method.

Due to the difficulties in discriminating false negatives from our pipeline and the false positives in PPI
databases, we also adopted an alternative method to estimate the recall. The human interactome is
estimated to contain between 74k to 200k PPIs (3). Among the 17,849 PPIs in our high-confidence
set, 16,064 (17,849 x 0.9) are expected to be true positives, corresponding to recall between 8.0%
(16,064 / 200,000) and 21.7% (16,064 / 74,000). Similarly, among the 29,257 PPIs in the confidence

                                                                                                             45
set, 23,406 are expected to be true positives, corresponding to recall between 11.7% (23,406 / 200,000)
and 31.6% (23,406 / 74,000).




M6. Analyzing predicted PPIs
M6.1 Integrating predicted PPIs with knowledge in databases
As described in M1, we obtained information about PPIs from STRING, BioGRID, and UniProt
databases. We also obtained PPIs from two projects aiming at resolving the human interactome, HuRI
(http://www.interactome-atlas.org/) and BioPlex (https://bioplex.hms.harvard.edu/). HuRI and BioPlex
contain PPIs for different isoforms of human proteins, which we mapped to the canonical isoforms used
in our study by UniProt IDs.

In addition, we identified human protein pairs that can be mapped to interacting PDB chains. We added
PDB entries released up to May 2024, and repeated the procedure described in M3.1 to identify
interacting PDB chains. We compared human sequences used in our screen to sequences of PDB
chains using the sensitive mode of MMseqs (-s 7). If a pair of human proteins are homologous to two
interacting PDB chains, we consider that the PDB chain pair can serve as a structure template for the
human protein pair.

We identify protein pairs with structural templates and split them into two categories: 1) with orthologous
PDB templates if both proteins can be aligned to two interacting PDB chains with identity > 50% and hit
(the PDB chain) coverage > 0.8 and 2) with homologous PDB templates if the pair does not have
orthologous templates but both proteins can be aligned to two interacting chains with MMseqs e-value
< 0.00001. A total of 3.72M pairs of proteins used in our screen found homologous (not orthologous)
PDB templates, while only 10,757 found orthologous PDB templates. There can be remote templates
for a PPI that cannot be detected by MMseqs. However, if the sequences have diverged sufficiently
beyond the recognition of a sensitive search by MMseqs, the interaction interface between two proteins
might have diverged as well, making it meaningful to ignore such templates and model the complex
structure de novo.

We compared the predicted PPIs in our high-confidence set to those from various sources (Table S8).
The number of PPIs involving the 20,296 human proteins from each data source is listed in the “Total
pairs” column of Table S8. Some sources contain a smaller set of confident PPIs, such as our positive
controls and the PDB ortholog set consisting of pairs with orthologous PDB templates. Most of these
sources contain a large number of PPIs identified through large-scale experiments and are plagued by
false positives, including HuRI, BioPlex, UniProt, STRING (physical), and BioGRID. Finally, we also
included an even larger number of pairs with homologous PDB templates and genetic interactions. Such
evidence does not directly confirm physical interactions, but they are still helpful for PPI prediction.
Since our screening pipeline processed only 19,528 human proteins (see M5.1), a slightly reduced
number of pairs from each source were included in our analysis (“Screened pairs” in Table S8). We
analyzed the intersection between our predicted PPIs and each external PPI source with less than
200,000 pairs, and the results are shown as Venn diagrams in Figure S25.

                                                                                                        46
     Table S8. Estimated accuracy of PPI sources using their overlap with our predictions.

                        Total    Screened Predicted Predicted
       PPI source                                                   Recall     Precision    F1 score
                        pairs      pairs    pairs      rate
       Positive       3,988         3,632     1,381     34.6%     2.0 – 5.4%    100%       0.04 – 0.10
     PDB ortholog    10,757         9,725     3,037     28.2%     5.4 – 15%     100%       0.10 – 0.25
         HuRI        46,767        45,935     1,747      3.7%       10.9%      17 – 47%    0.13 – 0.18
        BioPlex     166,375       152,032     4,636      2.8%        29%       13 – 35%    0.18 – 0.32
        UniProt      75,739        73,116     3,447      4.6%       21.5%      21 – 57%    0.21 – 0.31
    STRING physical
                     68,761       62,111      7,294     10.6%      34 – 40%    49 – 100%   0.47 – 0.51
     (score > 700)
    STRING physical 626,513       560,903    11,791      1.9%        73%       8.7 – 23% 0.16 – 0.36
      BioGRID MV     77,147    69,486         5,765      7.5%        36%        34 – 93% 0.35 – 0.52
        BioGRID     771,432 690,089          10,193      1.3%        63%       6.1 – 16% 0.11 – 0.26
     PDB homolog 3,972,786 3,719,139          9,719      0.2%        61%       1.1 – 3.0% 0.022 – 0.058
    STRING genetic 5,818,326 5,232,212       14,786      0.3%        92%       1.2 – 3.2% 0.023 – 0.061




    Figure S25. Venn diagrams showing the overlap between predicted PPIs and PPIs from
       other sources. The size of each circle correlates with the number of PPIs in each set.

We analyzed the number of pairs (“Predicted pairs” in Table S8) from each data source that were
predicted to interact by our pipeline. We found that the degree of overlap between our predicted set and
each external source correlates with the confidence level of that source’s PPIs. While a large fraction
(28%) of PPIs with orthologous PDB templates or bona fide PPIs from the positive control set can be
predicted by our in silico pipeline, a much smaller fraction (“Predicted rate” in Table S8) can be predicted
from other less confident PPI sources.


                                                                                                          47
We reason that if the ability of our computational pipeline to predict PPIs from different sets remains
constant, the fraction of PPIs we identify (𝑓𝑓𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴|𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 ) reflects the fraction of PPIs that are true, i.e., precision,
in each database (𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 ), which can estimated by the following formula:
                                  𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 = 𝑓𝑓𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴|𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 / 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴                                 (1)
As mentioned above, depending on the number of expected PPIs (𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 , from 74k to 200k) in humans,
we estimated the recall of our high-confidence set to be between 8% and 22%, based on the following
formula:
                                  𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 = 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 ⋅ 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 / 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃                    (2)
In the above formula, 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 is the total number of predicted PPIs in our high-confidence set; 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 = 90%,
and it is the expected precision of our predictions. Combining formulas (1) and (2), we can estimate the
range of precision of other PPI sources (“Precision” in Table S8) as follows:
                                   𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 = 𝑓𝑓𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴|𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 ⋅ 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 / (𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 ⋅ 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 ) (3)
For highly accurate databases, the above formula might resulted in an estimate above 100%, and we
capped 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 at 100%.

Our comprehensive and de novo PPI screen also allows us to estimate the recall of other PPI sources
(𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 ) based on the following formula:
                                   𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 = 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 ⋅ 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 / 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 (4)
In the above formula, 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 is the total number of candidate PPIs in a database (“Total pairs” in Table
S8). Except several PPI sources showing very high precision (estimated precision cannot be above
100%), 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 positively correlates with 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 based on formula (3), and thus the estimated 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 might
be a single value instead of a range. The estimated precision, recall, and F1 score (geometric mean of
precision and recall) for each PPI source is listed in Table S8.

To study how well our predicted PPIs can be used for functional inference, we gathered functional
annotations for human proteins. We downloaded information about human proteins in JSON format
from the UniProt website. From this file, we obtained various functional annotations of human proteins
that were used in our analyses. We extracted UniProt keywords associated with each protein and
grouped these keywords into the following categories: cellular components (CC), biological processes
(BP), and molecular functions (MF) based on information collected from the following webpage:
https://www.uniprot.org/keywords?query=*. We used overlap in these keywords to analyze if predicted
PPIs tend to share common cellular components and biological pathways (main Figure 3G).

In addition, each PPI inherited the UniProt keywords of the two partners, allowing us to classify PPIs by
these keywords and identify the enriched keywords among novel predictions. The enrichment of each
keyword was evaluated using a binomial test, where p = the fraction of all predicted PPIs associated
with this keyword, m = the number of novel PPIs associated with this keyword, and N = the number of
novel PPIs (main Figure 4B).




M6.2 Generating and analyzing 3D models for predicted PPIs
For every predicted PPI, we exploited the ColabFold pipeline to generate 5 AF2 models and 5 AFmm
models (see M5.5). We used these 3D models to identify the inter-protein contacts (interaction
probability > 0.5 and inter-residue distance < 6Å). Residues participating in such contacts were
considered as interface residues. We integrated the inter-protein contacts in 10 models (5 from AF2
and 5 from AFmm) to identify consistently predicted contacts present in ≥ 50% of models. The model

                                                                                                                    48
containing the largest number of such consistently predicted contacts was selected as the
representative structure model for each predicted PPI.

We compared the structural features of interfaces for predicted PPIs and interacting PDB chain pairs
that are orthologous to human proteins (see M6.1). Interface residues in predicted PPIs were identified
as above, whereas the interface residues in PDB chain pairs were identified only by inter-residue
distances (< 6Å). We classified these interface residues based on the type of regions they come from,
including globular domains, flexible helices, intrinsically disordered regions, and transmembrane (TM)
helices (main Figure 3H). Globular domains in human proteins were defined by the DPAM pipeline (36)
in our previous work (86). TM helices were defined based on UniProt annotations extracted from the
JSON file (see M6.1). Residues outside the globular domains or TM helices were further classified into
flexible helices or intrinsically disordered regions based on secondary structures in the AF2 model of
human monomeric proteins. The secondary structure of each residue was assigned by DSSP, and any
segment of more than 5 consecutive residues annotated as “H”, “G”, or “I” (G and I represent narrower
and wider helices, respectively) was considered a helix. We subsequently classified PPIs based on the
features of their interfaces: 1) we consider a PPI to be mediated by globular domains if more than 50%
of interface residues in both proteins belong to such regions; 2) we consider a PPI to involve flexible
helices if more than 50% of interface residues in at least one protein belong to such regions; 3) we
consider a PPI to involve disordered regions if more than 50% of interface residues in at least one
protein belong to such regions; and 4) we consider a PPI to be mediated by TM helices if more than
25% interface residues in at least one protein belong to such regions. These categories of PPI interfaces
are not always mutually exclusive (the 4th category can overlap significantly with the 1st) and some PPI
interfaces may not fall into any discrete category based on these definitions.




  Table S26. Our procedure to prepare additional benchmark sets to test the performance of
                       our pipeline on transmembrane (TM) proteins.



                                                                                                      49
From the above structural feature comparisons, we found that a higher fraction of predicted PPI
interfaces involves TM helices than interacting PDB chains (main Figure 3F). In order to study whether
this is an artifact of our in silico PPI screen pipeline, we prepared new benchmark sets consisting of TM
proteins (Figure S26). We assembled pairs of true interacting TM proteins (positives) from two sources.
The first is the set of human protein pairs with orthologous PDB templates, from which we selected
pairs with more than residues from TM helices in both proteins forming inter-protein contacts (distance
< 6Å). The second is the 3,988 bona fide PPIs in our positive control set, from which we selected pairs
of TM proteins (according to UniProt annotations). A total of 318 interacting TM proteins that went
through our “DCA (0.12) → RF2-PPI (0.3) → AF2” pipeline were selected as the TM positive control
set. From this set, we further selected pairs where at least one protein contained only a single TM helix,
resulting in the single transmembrane (STM) positive control set consisting of 215 pairs. From the
140M negative control pairs that went through our “DCA (0.12) → RF2-PPI (0.3) → AF2” pipeline, we
identified pairs of TM proteins, and randomly sampled 318,000 pairs to use as the TM negative control
set. Similarly, we created a STM negative control set where at least one TM protein contains only one
TM helix; this set consists of 215,000 pairs.

We evaluated the performance of our pipeline based on these benchmark sets. We combined protein
pairs in the TM positive control set and the TM negative control set. We ranked pairs that had not
passed our DCA cutoff (0.12, stage1 pairs) at the bottom and pairs that progressed to the AF2 stage
(stage3 pairs) at the top; the remaining pairs which stopped at the RF2-PPI stage (stage2 pairs) were
placed in the middle. Within each stage, we ranked pairs according to the score (𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 , 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 ,
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 , see M5) used in that stage. This way, we can evaluate the joint performance of the three
stages in distinguishing positive controls from the negative controls. We computed the precision and
recall at each rank and obtained the precision versus recall curve shown in main Figure 3I. We
repeated this procedure on different benchmark sets: the STM positive control set versus STM
negative control set, as well as the positive benchmark set versus the negative benchmark set
(see M4.1), i.e., our primary benchmark sets for performance evaluation.

In order to understand how the 3D models of PPIs might help us understand protein function. We
extracted the functional sites of each protein annotated in the UniProt JSON file. Specifically, we
extracted the following features: “modified residue”, “active site”, “binding site”, “glycosylation”, and
“lipidation”; we considered “modified residue”, “glycosylation”, and “lipidation” as post-translational
modification (PTM) sites and the rest as functional sites. We examined if these sites overlap with
interface residues both in structure models of predicted PPIs and experimental structures of PPIs (with
orthologous PDB templates, main Figure 3J).

In order to identify disease-associated mutations on the PPI interfaces, we downloaded files containing
information about single amino acid variations (SAVs) in humans and their association with diseases
from UniProt at: https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/variants/
humsavar.txt       and      https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/
variants/homo_sapiens_variation.txt.gz. We compared the wildtype amino acid at each SAV position
against the amino acid in our sequences to ensure these SAVs matched our protein sequences. If the
fraction of mismatches in a protein was above 5%, we discarded the SAVs of that protein; as a result,
SAVs associated with 246 proteins (1.3%) were discarded. In addition, we downloaded AlphaMissense
predictions from         https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/_details/dm_alphamissense/.
Similarly, we checked if the reference sequences used by AlphaMissense matched our sequences, and
discarded 3 proteins (0.01%) showing >5% mismatched residues. We considered three types of
evidence that support the pathogenicity of a SAV, including: 1) predicted as pathogenic by
AlphaMissense; 2) annotated as “pathogenic” or “likely pathogenic” by UniProt, and 3) linked to

                                                                                                                            50
diseases by UniProt. We included SAVs supported by at least two of the above criteria, resulting in a
total of 10.4M SAVs that are potentially pathogenic. We mapped these SAVs to the interface residues
of predicted and experimental protein complexes (main Figure 3J).

To present the protein complex models (main Figure 4), we extracted the residue pairs with contact
probabilities greater than 0.5. For rendered complexes, we only marked the top 25 representative (one
per residue) high-scoring inter-protein contacts (distance < 8Å) with a bar to connect the interacting
residue pairs. If a residue at the PPI interface is associated with pathogenic SAVs, we show this residue
as yellow spheres and display neighboring side chains; however we do not show the inter-protein
interaction bars in such cases for visual clarity. Further, we removed highly disordered and highly
flexible regions (in the case of coiled-coils) from the rendered structure if they were not part of any
interface interactions for visual clarity. These removed regions were primarily at the C and/or N terminus
of proteins. In some cases (main Figure 5) we overlay experimentally determined structures from the
PDB onto our modeled higher order complexes to show how our predictions can add new components
to known complexes. These experimental structures are shown as gray transparent surface renderings.




M6.3 Identifying new protein complexes and new components to known
complexes
We integrated the 17,849 predicted PPIs and the 9,725 PPIs with orthologous PDB templates, two PPI
sources showing high precision (main Figure 3D), to identify high-order protein complexes. We found
that some human proteins, such as ubiquitins, are included in many PDB entries, forming contacts with
other proteins although they do not function together with these proteins. We were interested in the
networks formed by predicted PPIs; however, including such interaction hubs found in experimental
structures might bias the results towards experimental evidence. We identified such proteins that might
contribute to the aforementioned problems by the following criteria: 1) less than ⅓ of the interactions
derived form orthologous PDB templates are supported by AF2 interaction probabilities > 0.5, and 2)
the total number of PDB-derived interacting partners with AF2 interaction probabilities ≤ 0.5 is above 5.
We removed PPIs involving these proteins unless they are supported by moderate AF2 interaction
probabilities (> 0.5).

After this filter, we tried several widely used methods implemented in Cytoscape (92) to cluster proteins
using their interactions as linkages. We found most of these methods are not suitable for identifying
high-order protein complexes because they assume that each protein should only belong to one cluster
when in reality, a protein might serve as a component of multiple protein complexes. In addition, some
multifunctional proteins can interact with many other proteins. Including such proteins in clustering might
result in large clusters of functionally irrelevant proteins. We thus developed our own method to find
clusters of proteins with a high density of connections (interactions) between proteins, and we require
each protein in a cluster to interact with at least two other components of the same cluster (Figure S27).

We initially found clusters of 3 or 4 proteins where each protein is interacting with another two proteins,
i.e., trimers and tetramers. We found that homologous proteins frequently interact with the same partner.
While it is relatively common for paralogs, especially closely related ones, to share interacting partners
(93), it is unlikely that these homologs are simultaneously present in a protein complex. Instead, they
may represent an alternative component of a complex. Therefore, we only considered trimers and
tetramers without any homology between their component proteins (detected by MMseqs with the “-s

                                                                                                        51
7” flag and showing e-value < 0.00001). As a result, we found 3,733 trimers and 2,123 tetramers, which
we used as seeds for larger clusters.




     Figure S27. Illustration of our procedure to identify putative clusters of proteins. Each
     cluster is represented as a graph; proteins are represented as nodes in a graph; edges in the
 graph represent an interaction between two proteins. Homologous proteins are coded in the same
  color. Dashed lines representing the interactions between by a protein to be included in a cluster
 and existing proteins in a cluster. If a new protein is homologous to another protein in the cluster, it
 will be merged to the same node as its homolog. If a new protein is not homologous to any existing
                           protein, it will be used as a new node in the graph.

We converted each seed into a graph, where each node in the graph can store one protein or multiple
homologous proteins. We added additional proteins to each cluster, starting with the protein showing
the highest cumulative AF2 interaction probability with existing nodes in a cluster: if a node contains
multiple homologous proteins, the highest AF2 interaction probability among these proteins is taken as
the value for this node. We only add a protein to a cluster if it interacts with at least two nodes in the
cluster. If a new protein is homologous to another protein in the cluster, it will be merged to the same
node as its homolog. If a new protein is not homologous to any existing proteins, it will be used as a
new node in the graph. After adding all proteins interacting with at least two nodes in the cluster, we
compared the clusters initiated by different seeds. We considered two clusters to be redundant if the
shared nodes (nodes with any common proteins) between them is larger than 80% for the smaller
cluster, and we removed the smaller cluster (with fewer nodes) in such cases. As a result, 404 clusters
were identified (supplemental Data S7). We manually studied these clusters with the help of Cytoscape,
focusing on cases rich in novel predictions without strong prior evidence, i.e., not considered confident
by any PPI databases and do not have orthologous PDB templates (main Figure 5).

To identify potential novel components to well-known human protein complexes, we extracted
information about human proteins in the Complex Portal database (93) from the UniProt JSON file. We
identified a putative new component to each complex if it satisfies the following criteria: 1) the new
component is predicted to interact with at least two components; 2) over half of the predicted interactions
of this new component are known components of this complex; 3) interactions between known
components and the new component are not supported by strong prior evidence, i.e., not considered
confident by any PPI databases and do not have orthologous PDB templates. We identified 64 proteins

                                                                                                        52
that are potentially new components to 61 complexes in the Complex Portal database (supplemental
Data S8). We manually studied these cases with the help of Cytoscape and highlighted a number of
representative cases (main Figure 5).




Supplemental Results
R1. Evaluating the performance of our multiple sequence alignments
In our omicMSA, we included one sequence per source data (e.g., the draft genome of a species or the
genomic reads of a species) for each human protein. To build pMSAs, we concatenated the sequences
from the same source. We compared omicMSAs against MSAs built by widely-used strategies (HHblits
and colabfold/MMseqs) to test how they affect the performance of different tools. These widely-used
strategies were used to build MSAs of single proteins, and pMSAs were obtained by concatenating the
closest hits of the two query proteins in each taxon.
The common approach first is HHblits against UniRef, a widely used strategy to prepare MSA inputs for
RF2 and AF2. By default, HHblits filters the output MSAs at 90% sequence identity, and we named this
strategy UniRef90. However, filtering the single-protein MSAs at 90% before pairing them significantly
reduces the fraction of sequences that can be paired because different sets of taxa might be kept in
these two MSAs. To fix this problem, we disabled the sequence identity filter by turning on the “-all”
option in HHblits and termed this alternative strategy UniRef100. Sequences from metagenomic data
are frequently used to obtain deeper MSAs and improve structure prediction (27). Thus, we exploited
the MSA building pipeline of ColabFold (28), which combines UniRef and metagenomic sequences. We
only used sources or taxa present in both MSAs to make the pMSAs. However, the default MSA building
pipeline of ColabFold also added sequences from taxa present only in one of the two proteins at the
end of the pMSA, i.e., unpaired sequences. We wondered if adding unpaired sequences help to
distinguish true PPIs from the false ones, and thus for both pMSAs made by ColabFold and from
omicMSAs, we tried to add unpaired (UP) sequences (colabMSA + UP and omicMSA + UP). Such
unpaired sequences might be helpful for modeling the monomers and thus beneficial for complex 3D
structure modeling. However, they do not provide coevolutionary signals and thus adding them does
not help predicting true PPIs (Figure S28).

We tested the performance of pMSAs built with these different strategies in combination of different AI
networks, including RF-2track, the 2-track version of RoseTTAFold we used for PPI screen in yeast,
RF2-lite, a lightweight version of the full RF2 network we used for PPI screen in bacterial pathogens,
RF2-PPI, the new AI network developed in this study, and AF2, which remains the best in accuracy for
distinguishing true PPIs from false ones at low signal-to-noise ratios (Figure S28). Regardless of what
AI network is used, omicMSA shows remarkably better performance than MSAs built with other
strategies. Adding unpaired sequences decreased the performance of different AI networks, although

                                                                                                    53
people showed previously that this strategy could improve the accuracy of predicted complex structure
(9). We reason that degradation in performance can be attributed to the fact that unpaired sequences
do not provide coevolutionary signals between the two proteins for these models, and thus they are not
helpful for distinguishing true PPIs among random pairs.




  Figure S28. Comparing the performance of our omicMSA against other common strategies
  for MSA construction. We tested how these MSAs perform with different AI networks, including
 (A) RF-2track used for PPI screen in Yeast, (B) RF2lite used for PPI screen in pathogen, (C) RF2-
    PPI developed in this study, and (D) AF2. “+UP” means unpaired sequences are added to the
                                               pMSAs.




                                                                                                   54
R2. Comparing the performance of RF2-PPI against other tools
R2.1 Comparison against AF-like networks
Compared to our previous AI networks for proteome-wide PPI screens, i.e., the RF-2track (14) used for
yeast and the RF2-lite (18) used for human pathogens, RF2-PPI shows much better performance
(Figure S29A) in distinguishing the positive benchmark set from the negative benchmark set. We
were concerned that this improved performance might be related to the fact that we used these
benchmark sets to guide our decisions in selecting the training datasets and network architecture. Thus
we tested the performance of these AI networks on 3,000 proteins selected from the positive test set
and 30,000 newly selected proteins from the large negative control set (negative test set). These
test sets not used in the process of our method development clearly demonstrated the superior
performance of RF2-PPI over the previous networks (Figure S29B).

The caveat of the positive test set is that PPIs in this set are not as strongly supported and a fraction
of them might be non-specific interactions (false positives) from experimental studies. In addition, the
positive set might contain a higher fraction of weaker and transient interactions that are harder to detect
for both experimental and our computational methods (see R3 below). Due to the potential false
positives and transient interactions in the positive test set, our networks showed much worse recall on
this set than the benchmark set (Figure S29B versus S29A).




    Figure S29. RF2-PPI shows significantly better performance than our previous tools for
   distinguishing (A) positive controls from the negative controls, and (B) positive validation
                                 set from the negative controls.

Finally, we compared RF2-PPI’s ability in distinguishing true PPIs from false ones against the much
slower AI networks, including the full version of RF2 (RF2full), AF2, AFmm, and the newly released AF3
with omicMSAs (Figure S30). We tried to use AF3 with omicMSAs, MSAs built from UniRef100
sequences, and omicMSAs, but AF3 seems to be not sensitive to the choice of MSAs. At a signal-to-
noise ratio of 1:1000, which approximates the situation of a de novo PPI screen, RF2-PPI’s performance
is only worse than AF2, and much better than RF2full, AFmm, or AF3. Both AFmm and RF2full are
trained with PPIs from PDB and optimized for predicting protein complex structures, and thus they might
tend to over-predict interactions for random protein pairs and show worse performance when the noise
level is high. However, when the noise level is low (for example, at 1:10), these more sophisticated AI
(AFmm, AF3, and RF2full) networks do perform better than RF2-PPI (Figure S31) in identifying the true
PPIs.


                                                                                                        55
   Figure S30. Comparison of performance between RF2-ppi and other more complicated AI
    networks for protein/complex structure modeling in distinguishing true PPIs from false
                           ones at a signal-to-noise ratio of 1:1000.




   Figure S31. Comparison of performance between RF2-ppi and other more complicated AI
    networks for protein/complex structure modeling in distinguishing true PPIs from false
                            ones at a signal-to-noise ratio of 1:10.

The newly developed AF3 aimed to reduce the influence of MSAs to protein modeling by having
dedicated and simple MSA embedding blocks while replacing the majority of the Evoformer by the
simpler Pairformer. In the Pairformer, the MSA representation is not retained; instead, all information is
passed through the pair representation. This de-emphasis on MSAs might have allowed AF3 to achieve
better performance in structure modeling (both monomers and oligomers), especially in cases without
deep MSAs. AF3 has an advantage over AF2 natively in modeling complexes that lack coevolutionary
signals, such as antigen-antibody interactions when generating a large number of seeds. However, the
coevolutionary signals in pMSAs are important for distinguishing the very small fraction of true PPIs
from all possible protein pairs in a proteome. Thus, the de-emphasis on MSAs have made AF3 less
suitable for proteome-wide PPI identification than AF2.

                                                                                                       56
R2.2 Comparison against tools to distinguish true PPIs from false ones
In addition to AF-like networks, the rapid progress in DL techniques has stimulated the development of
many tools for distinguishing PPIs from random pairs. These methods frequently utilize protein
language models and are trained with known experimental data. We searched for recently published
tools for PPI prediction. A large fraction of these methods did not provide pre-trained weights or code
that could be readily installed and executed. Among the dozen tools we examined, we were able to
install and run three: RAPPPID (94), D-SCRIPT (95), and TUnA (96). We compared RF2-PPI against
these tools, and found that they all performed significantly worse at a signal-to-noise ratio of 1:1000.
The only exception was the TUnA network trained on the “cross-species dataset” (TUnA-Xspecies),
which performed significantly better than the same network trained on the Bernett dataset (TUnA-
Bernett).
However, a closer inspection of the training data shows that a large fraction of protein pairs in our
positive benchmark set overlaps with the “cross-species dataset” used to train TUnA. Specifically,
38% of pairs are present in the training dataset (with both proteins sequence identity > 95%) and an
additional 39% are homologous to training pairs (with both proteins showing MMseqs e-value <
0.00001). We removed this potential leakage from the positive benchmark set and reweighted the
positive and negative pairs to maintain a signal-to-noise ratio of 1:1000. We recomputed the precision-
recall curve for TUnA-Xspecies (lime curve in Figure S32) after removing this leakage and observed a
drastic decrease in performance. This suggests that the reasonable performance of TUnA-Xspecies
largely arises from memorizing the training dataset. In agreement to our finding, a recent study (97) that
systematically evaluated different sequence and protein language model-based PPI predictors also
found that information leakage and homology-based inference are the main reasons for their apparent
effectiveness. Their ability to predict novel PPIs lacking homology is minimal (97).




 Figure S32. Comparison of performance between RF2-PPI and other dedicated networks for
    PPI prediction in distinguishing true PPIs from false ones at a signal-to-noise ratio of
                                            1:1000.

TUnA-Xspecies utilizes embeddings from a pre-trained protein language model and is trained on a
small set of positive and negative examples consisting of human protein pairs. TUnA-Xspecies was

                                                                                                       57
originally evaluated on its ability to predict PPIs in other species. If a pair of proteins interacts in humans,
their homologs are likely to interact in other organisms. Therefore, training on interacting human proteins
will allow TUnA-Xspecies to perform well in other species; however, this regime is unable to extend to
predicting novel PPIs. Instead, RF2-PPI learned to predict PPIs utilizing the coevolutionary signals in
the input pMSAs, allowing it to provide independent evidence from experimental results and predict
novel PPIs.
Another common issue of these AI networks for PPI prediction is that they are frequently optimized for
and tested on more balanced datasets, where the ratio of positive to negative controls is 1:1 or 1:10.
Thus, they are not well suited to work with the much lower signal-to-noise ratio (1:1000 to 1:3000
assuming 74k to 200k true interactions among 200M human protein pairs) in real de novo PPI screens.
Finally, compared to RF2-PPI, these models used a much smaller training dataset. They directly predict
if two proteins interact using tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of true PPIs. In contrast, RF2-
PPI, similar to AF2/3, makes predictions at the residue level, and thus each true PPI provides hundreds
of interacting residue pairs. The hundreds of thousands interacting protein/domain pairs in our training
dataset provide tens of millions of training cases for RF2-PPI to learn to predict inter-residue contacts.




R2.3 Performance of our pipeline on transient interaction
Transient interactions are hard to detect in experimental studies. We wondered how well our
computational methods performed in detecting transient interactions. It was observed that interface size
of PPIs correlates with their binding affinity (98). PPIs with smaller interfaces are expected to exhibit
weaker binding affinities and are more likely to be transient. We attempted to identify confident PPIs
with small interface sizes by searching for experimentally determined human protein complexes among
all candidate PPIs we gathered from the STRING, BioGRID, and Uniprot databases. We identified PDB
entries containing these candidate PPIs by finding highly similar PDB chains with MMseqs (-s7,
sequence identity > 95%, hit coverage > 90%). 9,257 such PPIs were mapped to interacting PDB chains
with more than 5 inter-chain contacts (residue pairs with distance < 6Å). Residues involved in these
inter-chain contacts were considered interface residues. Manual inspection suggests that some of such
interacting PDB chains with small interface sizes are held together by interacting with other components
of the protein complex, making it unclear if they would directly interact in isolation. Therefore, for each
PDB chain, we restricted our analysis to interacting partners with the largest PPI interfaces (number of
interface residues > maximal number of interface residues x 0.9). As a result, we identified 5,715 PPIs
with experimental structures.
We defined the size of each PPI interface as the average number of interface residues (distance to
another chain < 6Å) between the two PDB chains. PPIs with smaller interfaces tend to exhibit low
interaction probabilities by both RF2-PPI (Figure S33A) and AF2 (Figure S33B). PPIs with larger
interfaces are likely to contain more coevolving residues and exhibit higher binding affinities, making
them easier to detect using AI networks. To evaluate the ability of RF2-PPI and AF2 to detect true
transient PPIs among random pairs, we assembled two additional positive control sets based on PDB-
derived interactions. The first set consists of 264 PPIs with interface size <= 10 residues, representing
weaker and more transient interactions. The second set consists of 1782 PPIs with interface size > 50
residues, representing stronger and obligate interactions.




                                                                                                             58
        Figure S33. PPIs with larger interface (as measured by the average number of interface
  residues between two PDB chains) show higher interaction probability by (A) RF2-PPI and (B)
                                                  AF2
We tested the ability of RF2-PPI and AF2 to distinguish weak/transient and strong/obligate interactions
from random protein pairs at a signal-to-noise ratio of 1:1000. The results are shown in main Figure
2E. Both networks show much better performance on the strong and obligate interactions than their
performance on our positive benchmark set (see main Figure 2D). Conversely, they both show worse
performance in detecting the weak and transient interactions (sky blue and orange curves). It is
important to note that RF2-PPI substantially outforms AF2 on the set of weak/transient PPIs. This
is likely because the weak interactions often lack large and hydrophobic interfaces and are thus hard to
predict based on the physicochemical properties. AF2’s ability to integrate evolutionary and structural
features does not show an advantage in these cases. In contrast, RF2-PPI, without 3D features, focuses
purely on coevolutionary signals to distinguish these interactions from random pairs.




R2.4 Comparison against another approach to predict PPI interfaces
AF2/3 remains state-of-the-art for PPI interface prediction based on recent community-wide Critical
Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP, https://predictioncenter.org/casp16/index.cgi ) and Critical
Assessment of PRediction of Interactions (CAPRI, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/capri/) experiments.
RF2-PPI does not emphasize 3D structures, and the removal of 3D structure representation in RF2-PPI
prohibits it from outputting the 3D structures. However, because RF2-PPI predicts the contact
probability between residue pairs, it can be used to predict residues on PPI interfaces. Xiong et al.
recently published PIONEER (99), an ensemble DL framework that integrates a sequence-sequence
model, a sequence-structure model, a structure-sequence model, and a structure-structure model to
predict interface residues for known PPIs. Although PIONEER’s performance is worse than AF2/3, it
has the advantage of being much faster than AF2/3, if excluding its time-consuming input MSA
construction (using both PSIBLAST and HHsuite) and 3D structure template identification pipeline.
Excluding the MSA generation, the compute time for RF2-PPI is on the same magnitude as PIONEER.

We compared the performance of our pipeline against PIONEER. The PIONEER pipeline was used to
predict interface residues for 132,875 human PPIs without experimental structures in PDB at the time
when Xiong et al. performed the study over a year ago. We downloaded their predictions from
https://pioneer.yulab.org/downloads. We searched for PPI interfaces predicted by PIONEER whose 3D
structures have since become available in the PDB. We identified 487 protein pairs with experimental
3D structures that were also predicted by PIONEER, RF2-PPI, and AF2. Because we excluded human
                                                                                                     59
protein pairs and their homologs from RF2-PPI’s training dataset and protein complexes were not used
to train AF2, this set of 487 protein pairs offers a fair benchmark to evaluate the ability of these tools to
predict interface residues. We considered a residue to be on the PPI interface if its distance to residues
in another protein is less than 6Å in the experimental structure; if a residue’s distance from all residues
in another protein is more than 12Å, we considered it to be not on the interface. A total of 36,743
interface residues were identified from these 487 protein complexes in PDB.

PIONEER predicts interface residues while RF2-PPI and AF2 predict residue-residue contacts. To
enable comparison, we converted the predicted contacts into predicted interface residues using the
following formula: 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚(𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 ) , where 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the probability of residue 𝑖𝑖 to be on the
interface, 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 is the contact probability between residue 𝑖𝑖 and residue 𝑗𝑗 from another protein. We
compared the predictions with observed interface residues in experimental structures and the results
are shown in Figure S34. The distributed PIONEER results by the authors did not contain per-residue
confidence scores. Instead they partitioned the predictions into three datasets: “very high confidence”,
“high confidence”, and “medium confidence”, where the larger and less confident dataset includes all
predictions from the smaller and more confident dataset. The precision and recall of the three datasets
are marked in Figure S34. RF2-PPI (blue curve in Figure S34) and AF2 (green curve in Figure S34)
both achieved higher precision and recall than PIONEER. The 3D models in our work were generated
using AF2, and the precision and recall in predicted interface residues (magenta dot) are expected to
be better than PIONEER.




      Figure S34. Comparison between our tools against PIONEER in their ability to predict
              interface residues for experimentally determined human complexes.

The primary goal of our study is to distinguish true PPIs from false ones at a very low signal-to-noise
ratio (1:1000). Existing PPI databases and large-scale experimental results are often plagued by false
positives, which limits their utility for deriving biological insights. Therefore, we prioritized high precision
and the ability to identify novel PPIs. Using RF2-PPI and AF2 in combination with our omicMSA seems
effective for this purpose because they are conservative in predicting inter-residue contacts and only
predict interactions when strong coevolutionary signals and/or physicochemical complementary are
present at the PPI interfaces. When these networks fail to predict an interaction between two proteins,
they do not predict contacts or interface residues between them. In contrast, PIONEER prioritizes
predicting residues most likely to mediate the interaction under the assumption that the two proteins do

                                                                                                                       60
interact. Therefore, it predicts interface residues for any given pair of proteins. Although these
predictions may sometimes show low precision, they provide valuable starting points for experimental
studies. Similar to PIONEER, AFmm and AF3 are more optimized for predicting how two proteins
interact rather than determining whether they interact at all. Therefore, AFmm and AF3 are more
suitable for predicting the interfaces between proteins that are known to interact. Moreover, in cases
lacking coevolutionary signals, such as host-pathogen interactions and antigen-antibody interactions,
docking methods that rely on physical principles may be more suitable to predict how two proteins
interact.




R3. Features of PPIs that cannot be predicted by current methods
Despite our improvements to both the input MSAs and AI networks to predict PPIs, a large fraction of
PPIs remain challenging to distinguish from random pairs. We observed the same phenomenon for PPI
screens in bacteria and yeast: at a 90% precision, we can only achieve a recall around 30% of our
positive control PPIs. We wondered what sequence and structural features separate PPIs that can be
confidently predicted from those that cannot. We identified 5,749 pairs of human proteins whose
complex structures have been determined experimentally. In this analysis, we only used PDB
complexes of the exact human proteins, and structures of human orthologs were not used. Among
these pairs, we compared a set of 2,181 pairs (the predicted set), showing predicted interaction
probability above 0.9 by AF2 against another set of 2,434 pairs (the missed set), showing a predicted
interaction probability below 0.1 by AF2.

The predicted set shows higher pMSA depth than the missed set (Figure S35A), suggesting that
coevolutionary signals gleaned from deep pMSAs are important for predicting true, but possibly weak,
interactions. Coevolution at PPI interfaces is a result of purifying selection: mutations disrupting PPIs
will reduce the fitness and require compensatory mutations to survive natural selection. To understand
whether selection pressure at the PPI interfaces affects our ability to detect PPIs, we estimated the
selection pressure for interface residues using the fraction of nonsynonymous single nucleotide
variations (SNVs) observed in human populations. Because synonymous SNVs are mostly not
expected to cause phenotypic or fitness effects in humans, the rate of synonymous SNVs at a position
can serve as an indicator of mutation rate at that position. Comparing the nonsynonymous SNV rate
against the synonymous SNV rate indicates the selection pressure imposed on the nonsynonymous
SNVs (100). A higher ratio of nonsynonymous SNVs indicates a weaker purifying selection (100).

We obtained information about genetic variations (in VCF format) in human populations from the
gnomAD database (101), which contain the observed SNVs in the human genome and their frequency
obtained from over 700,000 whole exome sequencing results. We mapped the SNVs in the human
genome onto proteins used in our study based on genomic mapping data
(UP000005640_9606_proteome.bed) provided by UniProt at https://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/
uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/genome_annotation_tracks/UP000005640_9606_beds. This
mapping also allowed us to examine whether a SNV causes change in the protein sequence
(nonsynonymous). We noticed that synonymous SVNs seem to be underrepresented in the gnomAD
data, which is probably related to the fact that not all synonymous SVNs are reported by researchers

                                                                                                      61
who sequence human exomes/genomes because they are mostly not phenotypic. Nevertheless, such
a systematic bias towards nonsynonymous SNVs is not a problem given we are only interested in the
relative selection pressure (not the absolute values) between different PPI interfaces.




      Figure S35. Factors that affect whether a true PPI can be confidently predicted by AF2.
  Predicted PPIs show the following trends compared to the PPIs that are missed: (A) deeper MSAs
      after filtering at 90% sequence identity; (B) moderate purifying selection pressure of interface
  residues; (C) lower conservation of interface residues estimated by entropy (X-axis, higher entropy
    indicates lower conservation) in the pMSA; (D) larger numbers of interface residues (distance to
   another protein < 6Å); (E) smaller variability in interface residues among different PDB structures,
  as estimated by the fraction of alternative structures where an inter-protein contact (distance < 6Å)
                                                is maintained.

We identified contacts at each PPI interface as all residue pairs between the two proteins with distance
less than 6Å. Residues participating in such contacts are considered as interface residues. For each
PPI, we counted the number of synonymous and nonsynonymous SNVs mapped to these interface
residues, i.e., 𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 and 𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 . We estimated the selection pressure happening at a PPI interface by
𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 /𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 . PPIs are the easiest to predict when purifying selection pressure is moderate
(Figure S35B). We reason that when the purifying selection is too weak, it will not leave a strong trace
in the sequences. In contrast, when purifying selection is too strong, residues at the PPI interface will
be completely conserved, preventing the detection of coevolution. Consistent with this observation, the
predicted set displays slightly lower conservation (estimated by entropy of amino acid frequencies at a
position in the omicMSA, i.e 𝐻𝐻(𝑋𝑋) = − ∑𝑖𝑖=𝑛𝑛             𝑖𝑖=1   𝑃𝑃(𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖 )𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙2 𝑃𝑃(𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖 )) for residues at the PPI interface (Figure
S35C) than the missed set.


                                                                                                                                   62
We next analyzed the structural features of predicted and missed PPIs. As we expected, the predicted
PPIs show larger interfaces (Figure S35D), likely related to the fact that such interfaces contain more
coevolving residues and result in stronger affinity between the two proteins. Additionally, the interface
between a pair of interacting proteins is not always conserved among species and some PPIs possess
more than one possible interface. We hypothesize that high variability in PPI interfaces may prevent
their successful modeling and detection. Focusing on 908 PPIs from the predicted set and 419 from the
missed set for which there are more than 10 orthologous PDB templates. We mapped the human
sequences to these PDB sequences and determined residue pairs that are in contact (inter-residue
distance < 6Å). We evaluated the interface variability based on the average fraction of templates where
each inter-protein contact is present. The predicted set displays smaller variability in their interfaces
(Figure S35E), supporting our hypothesis.




R4. Biological insights revealed by uncharacterized PPI predictions
R4.1 Novel predictions involving G protein-coupled receptors
ADGR5 and SFTA2: ADGRF5 (also known as GPR116) belongs to the adhesion GPCR family, which
is characterized by large extracellular domains (ECDs) that mediate ligand binding and
mechanosensory functions. It plays a pivotal role in pulmonary physiology, particularly in regulating
surfactant metabolism by controlling the clearance of excess surfactant phospholipids from alveolar
spaces. Disruption of ADGRF5 function has been linked to abnormal surfactant accumulation,
contributing to alveolar proteinosis and impaired lung function. We detected a potential ligand or
modulator for ADGRF5 based on the predicted interaction between ADGRF5 and SFTA2 (Figure
S36A), a secreted small protein predominantly expressed in the lung. This interaction is mediated via
the extracellular domain of ADGRF5, suggesting that SFTA2 could serve as its endogenous ligand or
functional modulator. Given its localization in the lung and its extracellular location, SFTA2 could act as
a regulatory ligand that fine-tunes ADGRF5 activity, potentially influencing lung surfactant turnover,
alveolar integrity, and epithelial cell signaling. Activation of ADGRF5 by SFTA2 could influence key
downstream pathways such as cAMP signaling, Rho GTPase activation, or phospholipid metabolism,
which are critical for surfactant recycling and alveolar stability. The predicted ADGRF5-SFTA2
interaction represents a potential lung-specific regulatory mechanism that could be critical for surfactant
metabolism, alveolar homeostasis, and pulmonary health. If validated, this discovery could provide new
insights into adhesion GPCR function and open pathways for novel treatments targeting lung surfactant
disorders and respiratory diseases.

GPR35 and GPRC5C: We also identify predicted interactions between GPCR pairs that may work in
concert to mediate complex cellular responses. Notably, we predict an interaction between orphan
receptors GPR35 and GPRC5C (Figure S36B), suggesting a potential functional partnership with
implications for immune regulation and hematopoiesis. GPR35 plays a key role in macrophage
chemotaxis and inflammatory responses, while GPRC5C is known to promote the dormancy of
hematopoietic stem cells. The predicted heterodimer, which features a non-conventional dimer interface
between TMH1 and TMH2 of GPR35 and TMH6 and TMH7 of GPRC5C, may reveal novel signaling

                                                                                                        63
mechanisms underlying blood cell differentiation. This interaction hints at a previously unrecognized
crosstalk between inflammation and stem cell maintenance, opening avenues for further investigation
into its physiological relevance and therapeutic potential.




                    Figure S36. Additional novel predictions involving GPCRs.


HTR6 and CDH22: We also predict several additional interactions involving G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) through their transmembrane regions, highlighting potential cross-talk between
GPCR signaling and other cellular processes. One notable example is HTR6 (5-hydroxytryptamine
receptor 6), a GPCR that mediates serotonergic neurotransmission and plays a crucial role in
neuroplasticity, memory, and cognition. HTR6 was predicted to interact with CDH22, a single-pass
transmembrane protein belonging to the cadherin family, which is involved in cell adhesion in the
pituitary gland and brain tissues (Figure S36C). This predicted interaction suggests a previously
unrecognized link between GPCR signaling and cell adhesion mechanisms, which could have
significant implications for neural development, synapse formation, and brain function. Given that HTR6
is implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders and CDH22 is associated with neural tissue organization,
their interaction may play a role in processes such as neuronal connectivity, synaptic remodeling, or
brain tumor progression. Further experimental validation of this interaction could provide novel insights
into how serotonergic signaling influences cell adhesion dynamics and may uncover new therapeutic
targets for neurological diseases.

GPR152 and TMEM42: Another example of predicted PPI between GPCR and other TMPs involves
GPR152, an orphan GPCR. It is predicted to interact with TMEM42, a transmembrane protein of
unknown function. Sequence similarity searches using HHpred indicate that TMEM42 belongs to the
drug and metabolite transporter (DMT) superfamily, sharing homology with four-transmembrane (4-TM)
transporters such as Mg_trans_NIPA (Pfam: PF05653), a magnesium transporter, and EamA (Pfam:
PF00892), an EamA-like transporter. Given that homologs of TMEM42 are primarily involved in
transporting small molecules including drugs, metabolites, and nutrients, this suggests that TMEM42
may function as a transporter with a yet-to-be-determined substrate specificity. Notably, several DMT
superfamily transporters are implicated in bacterial multidrug resistance, supporting a potential role of
TMEM42 in xenobiotic or metabolite transport. Additionally, our structural predictions reveal that
TMEM42 forms a heterodimer with its homologous protein TMEM234. Our model suggests that the
interface involved in the GPR152-TMEM42 interaction is distinct from the TMEM42-TMEM234
interaction (Figure S36D). The association between GPR152 and TMEM42 raises the possibility that
GPCR signaling may regulate transporter activity, either by modulating substrate transport directly or
through downstream signaling cascades. Given that GPCRs often mediate cellular responses to

                                                                                                      64
extracellular signals, this interaction could represent a previously uncharacterized mechanism by which
metabolic or pharmacological processes are dynamically regulated. Further experimental validation will
be essential to elucidate the physiological relevance of this interaction and its potential implications in
drug transport, metabolic regulation, or cellular homeostasis.




R4.2 PPIs of proteins involved in immunity
IFITM1 and VAMP8: We predict interactions between IFITM1 (Interferon-Induced Transmembrane
Protein 1) and VAMP8 (Vesicle-Associated Membrane Protein 8). IFITM1 and VAMP8 play significant
roles in cellular processes related to the immune response and vesicle trafficking. IFITM1 is primarily
involved in antiviral defense. IFITM1 is induced by interferons and contributes to the cellular antiviral
state by inhibiting viral entry into host cells by preventing the fusion of viral membranes with cellular
membranes. VAMP8 is a SNARE protein involved in vesicle trafficking and membrane fusion which
plays roles in exocytosis, secretion of granules, and the fusion of lysosomes with phagosomes and
autophagosomes. VAMP8 also plays a role in the secretion of cytokines, which are crucial for immune
responses. IFITM1, being an interferon-stimulated gene, is part of the broader immune response. The
interaction between IFITM1 and VAMP8 (Figure S37A) could potentially create a negative feedback
loop of interferon signaling if such an interaction negatively affects the SNARE function of VAMP8.
Excessive IFITM1 proteins stimulated by interferon could interact with VAMP8 to inhibit its ability to form
SNARE complexes and thus negatively affect the trafficking of interferon-bearing vesicles and interferon
signaling. On the other hand, if the IFITM1-VAMP8 interaction promotes the SNARE function of VAMP8,
the upregulation of IFITM1 in response to interferon signaling could enhance VAMP8’s role in vesicle
trafficking and cytokine secretion, creating a more robust antiviral state.




         Figure S37. Additional novel predicted PPIs for proteins involved in immunity.

TYROBP and CD3D: TYROBP (Transmembrane Immune Signaling Adaptor TYROBP), is a signaling
adaptor protein that plays a crucial role in the transmission of activation signals from various receptors
on the surface of immune cells, including natural killer (NK) cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and
microglia. It is associated with several immunoreceptors such as TREM2, SIRPβ1, and KIR receptors.
CD3D (CD3δ, CD3 delta) is a component of the CD3 complex associated with the T-cell receptor (TCR)
on T cells. The CD3 complex is crucial for T cell activation and plays a vital role in the immune response.
HHpred results suggest that TYROBP and CD3D are remote homologs as they are both single-
transmembrane proteins with the cytoplasmic ITAM motif. We predict strong interactions between
TYROBP and CD3D (Figure S37B), suggesting a role of TYROBP in the function of T cell receptors.

                                                                                                        65
FCN1 and TPSAB1/HYAL1: FCN1 (Ficolin-1) is a crucial component of the innate immune system,
functioning primarily in pathogen recognition and the activation of the complement system. By binding
to specific carbohydrate structures on pathogens, FCN1 initiates the lectin pathway of complement
activation, leading to opsonization and enhanced phagocytosis. Tryptase is a trypsin-family serine
protease released by mast cells that plays a crucial role in inflammation, tissue remodeling, and allergic
reactions. It contributes to the degradation of the extracellular matrix, promotion of angiogenesis, and
activation of protease-activated receptors, leading to various cellular responses. Tryptase and FCN1
both play important roles in the innate immune response. Our method predicted strong interactions
between FCN1 and two tryptase proteins (TPSB2 and TPSAB1). Our structure model (Figure S37C
top) reveals that the interaction interface covers the active site of tryptase but does not fully conceal it.
The role of FCN1 on the catalytic activity of tryptase and the effect of this interaction in immune response
remain to be elucidated. Interestingly, FCN1 also interacts with HYAL1 (hyaluronidase-1, Figure S37C
bottom), a secreted enzyme involved in extracellular matrix remodeling. The interactions of FCN1 63
with these enzymes suggest potential roles of FCN1 in innate immune response related to the
extracellular matrix. This could open new directions for research into its functions and mechanisms.

PLPP6 and LOC122513141: Some predictions involve proteins with critical roles in the differentiation
and activation of specialized immune cells. One such interaction involves PLPP6, an enzyme that
contributes to neutrophil activation by dephosphorylating presqualene diphosphate (PSDP), a potent
negative regulator of neutrophil priming and oxidative burst. By modulating PSDP levels, PLPP6
facilitates pro-inflammatory responses, promoting effective innate immune defense. Our analysis
predicts a previously uncharacterized interaction between PLPP6 and LOC122513141 (Figure S37D),
both of which are integral membrane proteins localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane.
This interaction suggests a potential regulatory role for LOC122513141 in modulating PLPP6 function
or stability. Notably, LOC122513141 harbors a RING finger domain, which is evolutionarily related to
E3-ubiquitin ligases, such as RNF182 and TRIM32, both known for their involvement in protein
ubiquitination and degradation pathways. Given this domain architecture, LOC122513141 may function
as an E3 ligase, targeting PLPP6 for ubiquitination, ER-associated degradation (ERAD), or subcellular
trafficking. This potential regulatory mechanism could serve as a control point for lipid-mediated immune
signaling, ensuring that PLPP6 activity is dynamically regulated in response to inflammatory cues.
Dysregulation of this pathway could have implications in chronic inflammation, immune cell
hyperactivation, or lipid-driven immune disorders. Future studies characterizing the biochemical and
structural basis of this interaction will be crucial in elucidating its functional significance in neutrophil
biology and immune homeostasis.




R4.3 PPIs of mitochondrial proteins
MT-CYB and UQCC4: MT-CYB (Mitochondrial Cytochrome b) is a critical component of Complex III
(cytochrome bc1 complex) in the mitochondrial electron transport chain, playing a key role in oxidative
phosphorylation by facilitating electron transfer from ubiquinol to cytochrome c. UQCC4 (Ubiquinol-
Cytochrome c Reductase Complex Assembly Factor 4), on the other hand, is a poorly characterized
protein believed to function in the biogenesis and assembly of Complex III. Our analysis predicts a direct
interaction between MT-CYB and UQCC4 (Figure S38A), suggesting that UQCC4 may act as an
assembly factor or chaperone specifically guiding the proper folding, stability, or integration of MT-CYB
into the functional Complex III. Disruptions in MT-CYB function are linked to mitochondrial disorders,
neurodegenerative diseases, and metabolic syndromes, while defects in Complex III assembly factors

                                                                                                          66
are associated with respiratory chain deficiencies and mitochondrial myopathies. If UQCC4 is indeed
crucial for MT-CYB maturation or stability, its dysregulation could contribute to impaired ATP production,
increased oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction, making this interaction an important target
for further investigation in mitochondrial disease research.




             Figure S38. Additional novel predicted PPIs for mitochondrial proteins.

UQCRFS1 and CMC4: Our predictive analysis reveals several potential interactions involving
mitochondrial proteins with unknown functions cataloged in the MitoCarta database. Among these, we
identified an intriguing interaction between CMC4, a poorly characterized CX9C family protein, and
UQCRFS1, a crucial subunit of mitochondrial complex III (Figure S38B). UQCRFS1 is an essential
component of the electron transport chain (ETC), playing a pivotal role in cellular respiration by
facilitating electron transfer from ubiquinol to cytochrome c. Given that many CX9C family proteins
function as assembly factors or chaperones for mitochondrial respiratory complexes, our predicted
interaction suggests that CMC4 may serve as an assembly or stability factor for complex III. Such a role
would be critical for the proper formation and function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, which is
essential for ATP production. Future experimental studies will be necessary to determine whether
CMC4 directly assists in the maturation, stability, or regulation of complex III and how its dysfunction
might contribute to pathological conditions.

MT-CO3 and LOC128706665: A small, uncharacterized protein (LOC128706665, UniProt accession:
Q9HB66) consists of 63 amino acid residues and contains a single predicted transmembrane segment.
This protein is annotated as “alternative protein MKKS” in UniProt as it is transcribed from a gene
overlapping with the 5’ UTR of the MKKS (McKusick-Kaufman syndrome) gene . However, its coding
region is entirely distinct from that of MKKS, indicating that it functions independently of the canonical
MKKS protein. Our predictive modeling suggests that LOC128706665 interacts with MT-CO3, a core
subunit of mitochondrial complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase), likely through its transmembrane segment
(Figure S38C). This finding strongly suggests that LOC128706665 is a novel mitochondrial protein,
potentially involved in complex IV assembly, stability, or regulation. Interestingly, the coding region of
LOC128706665 contains a natural variant previously identified in MKKS patients, though ClinVar
classifies this variant as being of unknown significance and likely unrelated to MKKS disease. However,
AlphaMissense predicts this variant to be deleterious, and notably, it is located within the
transmembrane segment at the interface of the predicted LOC128706665-MT-CO3 interaction. This
raises the possibility that the variant could disrupt complex IV assembly or function, potentially leading
to mitochondrial dysfunction. Further experimental validation will be essential to determine whether
LOC128706665 plays a direct role in complex IV biogenesis and whether this variant contributes to
mitochondrial pathology.

C22orf39 and ATP23: C22orf39 is a small, poorly characterized protein. Our analysis predicts an
interaction between C22orf39 and ATP23 (Figure S38D), a thermolysin family metalloprotease defined

                                                                                                       67
by its conserved HEXXH catalytic motif. ATP23 functions as an essential assembly factor for
mitochondrial ATP synthase, playing a critical role in the maturation of the Atp6 subunit, which is
necessary for the proper function of the ATP synthase complex. Interestingly, sequence similarity
searches using HHpred indicate that C22orf39 may be a distant member of the CX9C family, a group
of small mitochondrial intermembrane space (IMS) proteins typically characterized by their conserved
Cys-X9-Cys (CX9C) motif, which forms stabilizing disulfide bonds between two α-helices. This structural
feature suggests that C22orf39 could serve a regulatory role, potentially acting as a chaperone or
cofactor for ATP23, influencing its proteolytic activity or guiding ATP synthase assembly. Given the
importance of ATP23 in mitochondrial bioenergetics, understanding its interaction with C22orf39, which
is supported by a recent mass spectrum analysis, could provide novel insights into mitochondrial
function, ATP synthase regulation, and potential links to mitochondrial disorders. Further biochemical
studies are needed to determine whether C22orf39 modulates ATP23 enzymatic activity, stability, or
substrate specificity, shedding light on its functional significance within the mitochondrial protein
network.




R4.4 PPIs of proteins involved in cancer
C6orf120 and SLIT1/SLIT2: C6orf120 is a glycosylated protein that contains an immunoglobulin-like
domain, though its precise biological function remains unknown. We predicted an interaction between
C6orf120 and SLIT1 and SLIT2, two closely related, long-secreted proteins characterized by multiple
conserved domains. Specifically, C6orf120 interacts with the N-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR)
domains of SLIT1 and SLIT2 (Figure S39A). SLIT1 and SLIT2 are well-established regulators of axon
guidance during neural development. They play a crucial role in directing neuronal growth and
preventing premature midline crossing of axons, ensuring proper neural circuit formation. Beyond axon
guidance, these proteins are also involved in the migration of neuronal precursors, contributing to the
organization and maturation of the central nervous system (CNS). In addition to their developmental
roles, SLIT proteins have been implicated in tumorigenesis. Notably, SLIT2 has been shown to function
as a tumor suppressor, exhibiting inhibitory effects on tumor growth and metastasis in certain cancers,
including fibrosarcoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Given the predicted interaction between
C6orf120 and SLIT proteins, further investigation into C6orf120’s role in neural development and cancer
biology may provide valuable insights into its potential function.

PERP and DSG2: The p53 tumor suppressor is a critical transcriptional regulator of cell-fate decisions,
including senescence, cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis. Mutations in p53 or its regulatory pathways are
frequently observed in various cancers. PERP (p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22) is a direct
transcriptional target of p53, primarily associated with apoptotic pathways and desmosome integrity,
though its full range of functions remains incompletely understood. Desmoglein-2 (DSG2), a
desmosomal cadherin, plays a crucial role in cell-cell adhesion and tissue integrity, with mutations linked
to ventricular cardiomyopathy. Our bioinformatics analysis predicts a direct interaction between DSG2
and PERP (Figure S39B), reinforcing previous findings that p53 functionally associates with DSG2.
This interaction suggests a possible role for PERP in desmosome stability and epithelial homeostasis,
potentially linking p53-dependent apoptosis with cell adhesion dynamics. Notably, DSG2 has been
found to be upregulated in skin cancer, while DSG3—another desmosomal cadherin—is frequently
overexpressed in cancers of the neck, lung, and other tissues. These observations suggest that p53
mutations may drive DSG2/DSG3 overexpression, promoting cancerous growth and metastatic


                                                                                                        68
potential. Further investigation into the DSG2-PERP interaction may provide valuable insights into
tumor progression, epithelial integrity, and potential therapeutic targets for p53-mutant cancers.




         Figure S39. Examples of novel predicted PPIs of proteins involved in cancers.

FANCM and SMC6: We predicted an interaction between FANCM (Fanconi Anemia Complementation
Group M) and SMC6 (Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes 6), both involved in DNA repair and
genome maintenance that are pivotal in cancer development. Both proteins are essential for maintaining
genomic integrity, with FANCM playing a key role in the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway, specifically in
the repair of interstrand crosslinks (ICLs), and SMC6 being part of the SMC5/6 complex responsible for
chromosome structure maintenance and resolution of DNA damage. Our predicted model suggests a
direct interaction between FANCM and SMC6 (Figure S39C). FANCM is a large protein with over 2,000
amino acids, and its interaction with SMC6 involves its N-terminal helicase domain that includes a P-
loop domain (residues 71-281) and a loop region (residues 620-646). The interaction with FANCM is
mediated by the coiled-coil regions of two alpha-helices (residues 413-446 and 686-716) of SMC6.
Experimental studies suggest that SMC5/6 complex could antagonize the potential toxic activity of yeast
Mph1 helicase, the ortholog of human FANCM (102). Based on these findings, our model proposes that
the interaction between FANCM and SMC6 could help regulate FANCM's helicase activity, potentially
suppressing its function in specific contexts to prevent unnecessary or excessive DNA repair activity,
which could lead to genomic instability.

PTEN and PLEKHA1: PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog) is a crucial tumor suppressor protein
that plays a vital role in regulating cell growth, division, cell cycle control, apoptosis, genomic stability,
and cell migration. As a negative regulator of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, PTEN counters cell
growth and survival signals by dephosphorylating PIP3 (phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate) into

                                                                                                           69
PIP2, effectively opposing the action of PI3K. PTEN’s tumor-suppressing function is underscored by
the frequent loss or mutation of this gene in a variety of cancers, including breast, prostate, and brain
cancers. Our predictive model suggests an intriguing interaction between PTEN and PLEKHA1
(Pleckstrin Homology Domain-containing Family A Member 1). PLEKHA1 contains two PH domains,
which are essential for binding to PIP2 and for targeting proteins to the cell membrane. PLEKHA1 has
been associated with various muscular degenerative conditions, and polymorphisms in its gene have
been linked to these diseases across different populations. However, the full cellular function of
PLEKHA1 remains underexplored. Our predicted interaction between PLEKHA1 and PTEN reveals that
PLEKHA1 primarily utilizes its first PH domain, along with a beta-hairpin region between the two PH
domains, to interact with opposite sides of PTEN, forming a large interaction interface (Figure S39D).
This interaction could enable PLEKHA1 to target PTEN to the cell membrane, positioning PTEN at the
site of action for its tumor-suppressive function. By interacting with PTEN, PLEKHA1 may facilitate more
effective access to PTEN’s catalytic product, PIP2, enhancing the regulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway.

ZNF511 and TMCO6: We predict an interaction between ZNF511 (Zinc Finger Protein 511) and TMCO6
(Transmembrane and Coiled-Coil Domain-Containing Protein 6), two poorly characterized proteins with
potential implications in cancer. ZNF511 contains three C2H2 zinc finger domains, suggesting a role in
DNA or RNA binding, potentially as a transcription factor or regulator of gene expression. TMCO6,
despite its name, does not contain transmembrane segments according to AlphaFold2 (AF2) structural
predictions (Figure S39E). Instead, it is predominantly composed of alpha-helical repeats, forming a
compact, globular structure. Notably, the UniProt-annotated transmembrane regions of TMCO6
(residues 338-358 and 386-406) are actually buried hydrophobic alpha-helices within the core of the
AF2 structural model, challenging previous assumptions about its membrane-associated function. Both
ZNF511 and TMCO6 are localized to the nucleus, suggesting a possible role in transcriptional regulation,
chromatin remodeling, or nuclear signaling. Their classification as prognostic markers in renal cancer
with an unfavorable outcome in the Human Protein Atlas database indicates a potential involvement in
cancer progression. Furthermore, ZNF511 overexpression has been reported in prostate cancer, hinting
at a broader oncogenic role. The predicted interaction between these proteins suggests they may
function together in nuclear pathways relevant to cancer biology, warranting further investigation into
their molecular mechanisms and potential as therapeutic targets.

DSCC1 and CDT1: We predicted the interaction between DSCC1 (DNA Replication and Sister
Chromatid Cohesion 1) and CDT1 (Chromatin Licensing and DNA Replication Factor 1) (Figure S39F),
two proteins that play crucial roles in DNA replication, genome stability, and cancer progression. DSCC1,
a component of the RFC-like complex, facilitates the loading of PCNA onto DNA and ensures proper
sister chromatid cohesion, while CDT1 is essential for DNA replication licensing by loading the MCM2-
7 helicase onto replication origins. Their interaction could enhance replication efficiency, stabilizing
CDT1 and preventing replication stress. Dysregulation of this interaction could have functional impact
in cancer, as CDT1 overexpression leads to DNA re-replication and genomic instability, a hallmark of
tumorigenesis. Both DSCC1 and CDT1 are frequently upregulated in cancers such as lung, breast, and
colorectal cancer, driving uncontrolled proliferation. Targeting this interaction presents a promising
therapeutic approach, with CDT1 inhibitors being explored to exploit cancer cells’ high replication stress
and selectively induce cell death. Understanding the DSCC1-CDT1 axis could lead to novel strategies
for cancer treatment.




                                                                                                      70
R4.5 Multi-subunit protein complex modeling
The CFAP65 complexes: We predict the formation of two protein complexes involved in sperm
biogenesis, highlighting their potential roles in spermatogenesis and flagellar assembly. The first
complex comprises the N-terminal region of CFAP65, CFAP69, LRGUK, and SPEF2 (Figure S40A),
while the second consists of the C-terminal region of CFAP65, CFAP70, MYCBPAP, and ARMC3
(Figure S40B). These complexes are likely integral components of a larger molecular machinery
essential for the structural and functional integrity of sperm flagella. Notably, CFAP65 serves as a
bridging factor, linking the two complexes through its interaction with LRGUK, suggesting coordinated
roles in cilia and flagella organization. Each of these proteins has been implicated in cilia-related
functions and male fertility disorders. CFAP69 and SPEF2 are crucial for sperm tail formation, and
mutations in SPEF2 have been associated with primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) and male infertility.
LRGUK is thought to regulate axoneme assembly, and defects in its function may lead to abnormal
flagellar development. The second complex, containing CFAP65, CFAP70, MYCBPAP, and ARMC3,
suggests involvement in microtubule organization and ciliary motility, as CFAP65 and CFAP70 are both
linked to dynein regulation and axonemal stability. MYCBPAP, a MYC-binding protein, may play a
regulatory role in germ cell development, while ARMC3 has been associated with cilia-related genetic
disorders. Given their interactions and known roles, these complexes likely contribute to the assembly,
stabilization, and functional regulation of sperm flagella, and their disruption may lead to sperm motility
defects and male infertility. Further investigation into these interactions could provide valuable insights
into the molecular basis of spermatogenesis disorders and potential therapeutic targets for treating male
infertility linked to flagellar dysfunction.




  Figure S40. Examples of multi-subunit structure modeling of protein complexes. Each panel
   contains the 3D structure of a complex and a network graph. Nodes in the graph are labeled by
  gene names and colored the same as the corresponding subunits in the 3D structure. Edges in the
   graph represent PPIs and are colored as follows: black, PPIs with experimental structures; blue,
    confident PPIs from databases; red: uncharacterized PPIs or with weak experimental support.

The INO80 complex: We predict multiple interactions among components of the INO80 chromatin
remodeling complex (CRC), allowing us to model a distinct regulatory subcomplex composed of
INO80D, INO80E, NFRKB, TFPT, MCRS1, and UCHL5 (Figure S40C). This model suggests that the
regulatory subcomplex primarily interacts with the N-terminal intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of
INO80, the core subunit of the CRC, while the C-terminal domains of INO80 engage with other core

                                                                                                        71
CRC subunits to facilitate chromatin remodeling. The regulatory subunits likely function as modulators,
fine-tuning CRC activities in transcription regulation, DNA replication, and DNA repair. Recent evidence
suggests that TBRG1 is a novel CRC subunit, as it was identified interacting with INO80. Our analysis
extends this observation by predicting that TBRG1 associates with multiple CRC subunits through an
extended N-terminal alpha-helix, enabling interactions with not only INO80 but also TFPT, NFRKB, and
INO80E (Figure S40C). Given its established role in cell cycle regulation and cell growth, TBRG1 may
serve as a critical link between CRC activity and cellular proliferation control.




                                                                                                     72
Captions for Supplementary Data files

Data S1. Protein pairs used for benchmarking
Data S2. Interacting protein pairs classified into three groups by interface size
Dataset S3. Final set of predicted PPI at expected precision of 90% (a subset of Dataset
S4)
Dataset S4. Final set of predicted PPI at expected precision of 80%
Data S5. Prediced PPIs involving proteins of unknown function
Data S6. Predicted PPIs absent from existing PPI databases (UniProt, BioGRID, and
STRING by Sep 2023) and lacking homologous templates in the PDB (by Jan 2024)
Data S7. Predicted multi-protein complexes based on our predictions and orthologous
PDB templates of human protein pairs
Data S8. Predicted new components to known protein complexes




                                                                                     73
References and Notes
1. T. Rolland, M. Taşan, B. Charloteaux, S. J. Pevzner, Q. Zhong, N. Sahni, S. Yi, I. Lemmens, C.
       Fontanillo, R. Mosca, A. Kamburov, S. D. Ghiassian, X. Yang, L. Ghamsari, D. Balcha, B. E.
       Begg, P. Braun, M. Brehme, M. P. Broly, A.-R. Carvunis, D. Convery-Zupan, R. Corominas, J.
       Coulombe-Huntington, E. Dann, M. Dreze, A. Dricot, C. Fan, E. Franzosa, F. Gebreab, B. J.
       Gutierrez, M. F. Hardy, M. Jin, S. Kang, R. Kiros, G. N. Lin, K. Luck, A. MacWilliams, J.
       Menche, R. R. Murray, A. Palagi, M. M. Poulin, X. Rambout, J. Rasla, P. Reichert, V. Romero,
       E. Ruyssinck, J. M. Sahalie, A. Scholz, A. A. Shah, A. Sharma, Y. Shen, K. Spirohn, S. Tam,
       A. O. Tejeda, S. A. Wanamaker, J.-C. Twizere, K. Vega, J. Walsh, M. E. Cusick, Y. Xia, A.-L.
       Barabási, L. M. Iakoucheva, P. Aloy, J. De Las Rivas, J. Tavernier, M. A. Calderwood, D. E.
       Hill, T. Hao, F. P. Roth, M. Vidal, A proteome-scale map of the human interactome network.
       Cell 159, 1212–1226 (2014). doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050 Medline
2. V. S. Rao, K. Srinivas, G. N. Sujini, G. N. S. Kumar, Protein-protein interaction detection: Methods
        and analysis. Int. J. Proteomics 2014, 147648 (2014). doi:10.1155/2014/147648 Medline
3. K. Venkatesan, J.-F. Rual, A. Vazquez, U. Stelzl, I. Lemmens, T. Hirozane-Kishikawa, T. Hao, M.
       Zenkner, X. Xin, K.-I. Goh, M. A. Yildirim, N. Simonis, K. Heinzmann, F. Gebreab, J. M.
       Sahalie, S. Cevik, C. Simon, A.-S. de Smet, E. Dann, A. Smolyar, A. Vinayagam, H. Yu, D.
       Szeto, H. Borick, A. Dricot, N. Klitgord, R. R. Murray, C. Lin, M. Lalowski, J. Timm, K. Rau,
       C. Boone, P. Braun, M. E. Cusick, F. P. Roth, D. E. Hill, J. Tavernier, E. E. Wanker, A.-L.
       Barabási, M. Vidal, An empirical framework for binary interactome mapping. Nat. Methods 6,
       83–90 (2009). doi:10.1038/nmeth.1280 Medline
4. A. Bateman, M.-J. Martin, S. Orchard, M. Magrane, R. Agivetova, S. Ahmad, E. Alpi, E. H.
       Bowler-Barnett, R. Britto, B. Bursteinas, H. Bye-A-Jee, R. Coetzee, A. Cukura, A. Da Silva, P.
       Denny, T. Dogan, T. G. Ebenezer, J. Fan, L. G. Castro, P. Garmiri, G. Georghiou, L. Gonzales,
       E. Hatton-Ellis, A. Hussein, A. Ignatchenko, G. Insana, R. Ishtiaq, P. Jokinen, V. Joshi, D.
       Jyothi, A. Lock, R. Lopez, A. Luciani, J. Luo, Y. Lussi, A. MacDougall, F. Madeira, M.
       Mahmoudy, M. Menchi, A. Mishra, K. Moulang, A. Nightingale, C. S. Oliveira, S. Pundir, G.
       Qi, S. Raj, D. Rice, M. R. Lopez, R. Saidi, J. Sampson, T. Sawford, E. Speretta, E. Turner, N.
       Tyagi, P. Vasudev, V. Volynkin, K. Warner, X. Watkins, R. Zaru, H. Zellner, A. Bridge, S.
       Poux, N. Redaschi, L. Aimo, G. Argoud-Puy, A. Auchincloss, K. Axelsen, P. Bansal, D.
       Baratin, M.-C. Blatter, J. Bolleman, E. Boutet, L. Breuza, C. Casals-Casas, E. de Castro, K. C.
       Echioukh, E. Coudert, B. Cuche, M. Doche, D. Dornevil, A. Estreicher, M. L. Famiglietti, M.
       Feuermann, E. Gasteiger, S. Gehant, V. Gerritsen, A. Gos, N. Gruaz-Gumowski, U. Hinz, C.
       Hulo, N. Hyka-Nouspikel, F. Jungo, G. Keller, A. Kerhornou, V. Lara, P. Le Mercier, D.
       Lieberherr, T. Lombardot, X. Martin, P. Masson, A. Morgat, T. B. Neto, S. Paesano, I.
       Pedruzzi, S. Pilbout, L. Pourcel, M. Pozzato, M. Pruess, C. Rivoire, C. Sigrist, K. Sonesson, A.
       Stutz, S. Sundaram, M. Tognolli, L. Verbregue, C. H. Wu, C. N. Arighi, L. Arminski, C. Chen,
       Y. Chen, J. S. Garavelli, H. Huang, K. Laiho, P. McGarvey, D. A. Natale, K. Ross, C. R.
       Vinayaka, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, L.-S. Yeh, J. Zhang, P. Ruch, D. Teodoro; UniProt Consortium,
       UniProt: The universal protein knowledgebase in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D480–D489
       (2021). doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa1100 Medline
5. R. Oughtred, J. Rust, C. Chang, B.-J. Breitkreutz, C. Stark, A. Willems, L. Boucher, G. Leung, N.
       Kolas, F. Zhang, S. Dolma, J. Coulombe-Huntington, A. Chatr-Aryamontri, K. Dolinski, M.
       Tyers, The BioGRID database: A comprehensive biomedical resource of curated protein,
       genetic, and chemical interactions. Protein Sci. 30, 187–200 (2021). doi:10.1002/pro.3978
       Medline
                                                                                                       74
6. D. Szklarczyk, R. Kirsch, M. Koutrouli, K. Nastou, F. Mehryary, R. Hachilif, A. L. Gable, T. Fang,
       N. T. Doncheva, S. Pyysalo, P. Bork, L. J. Jensen, C. von Mering, The STRING database in
       2023: Protein-protein association networks and functional enrichment analyses for any
       sequenced genome of interest. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D638–D646 (2023).
       doi:10.1093/nar/gkac1000 Medline
7. D. Petrey, H. Zhao, S. J. Trudeau, D. Murray, B. Honig, PrePPI: A structure informed proteome-
       wide database of protein-protein interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 435, 168052 (2023).
       doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2023.168052 Medline
8. H. Zhao, D. Petrey, D. Murray, B. Honig, ZEPPI: Proteome-scale sequence-based evaluation of
       protein-protein interaction models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 121, e2400260121 (2024).
       doi:10.1073/pnas.2400260121 Medline
9. M. Gao, D. Nakajima An, J. M. Parks, J. Skolnick, AF2Complex predicts direct physical
       interactions in multimeric proteins with deep learning. Nat. Commun. 13, 1744 (2022).
       doi:10.1038/s41467-022-29394-2 Medline
10. E. W. Bell, J. H. Schwartz, L. Freddolino, Y. Zhang, PEPPI: Whole-proteome protein-protein
       interaction prediction through structure and sequence similarity, functional association, and
       machine learning. J. Mol. Biol. 434, 167530 (2022). doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2022.167530 Medline
11. J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R.
        Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland, C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J. Ballard, A. Cowie,
        B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Petersen, D. Reiman, E. Clancy,
        M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer, S. Bodenstein, D. Silver, O.
        Vinyals, A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Kohli, D. Hassabis, Highly accurate protein
        structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583–589 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41586-021-
        03819-2 Medline
12. M. Baek, F. DiMaio, I. Anishchenko, J. Dauparas, S. Ovchinnikov, G. R. Lee, J. Wang, Q. Cong,
       L. N. Kinch, R. D. Schaeffer, C. Millán, H. Park, C. Adams, C. R. Glassman, A. DeGiovanni,
       J. H. Pereira, A. V. Rodrigues, A. A. van Dijk, A. C. Ebrecht, D. J. Opperman, T. Sagmeister,
       C. Buhlheller, T. Pavkov-Keller, M. K. Rathinaswamy, U. Dalwadi, C. K. Yip, J. E. Burke, K.
       C. Garcia, N. V. Grishin, P. D. Adams, R. J. Read, D. Baker, Accurate prediction of protein
       structures and interactions using a three-track neural network. Science 373, 871–876 (2021).
       doi:10.1126/science.abj8754 Medline
13. I. R. Humphreys, J. Zhang, M. Baek, Y. Wang, A. Krishnakumar, J. Pei, I. Anishchenko, C. A.
        Tower, B. A. Jackson, T. Warrier, D. T. Hung, S. B. Peterson, J. D. Mougous, Q. Cong, D.
        Baker, Essential and virulence-related protein interactions of pathogens revealed through deep
        learning. bioRxiv 2024.04.12.589144 [Preprint] (2024);
        https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.12.589144.
14. I. R. Humphreys, J. Pei, M. Baek, A. Krishnakumar, I. Anishchenko, S. Ovchinnikov, J. Zhang, T.
        J. Ness, S. Banjade, S. R. Bagde, V. G. Stancheva, X.-H. Li, K. Liu, Z. Zheng, D. J. Barrero, U.
        Roy, J. Kuper, I. S. Fernández, B. Szakal, D. Branzei, J. Rizo, C. Kisker, E. C. Greene, S.
        Biggins, S. Keeney, E. A. Miller, J. C. Fromme, T. L. Hendrickson, Q. Cong, D. Baker,
        Computed structures of core eukaryotic protein complexes. Science 374, eabm4805 (2021).
        doi:10.1126/science.abm4805 Medline
15. Q. Cong, I. Anishchenko, S. Ovchinnikov, D. Baker, Protein interaction networks revealed by
       proteome coevolution. Science 365, 185–189 (2019). doi:10.1126/science.aaw6718 Medline
                                                                                                       75
16. D. F. Burke, P. Bryant, I. Barrio-Hernandez, D. Memon, G. Pozzati, A. Shenoy, W. Zhu, A. S.
        Dunham, P. Albanese, A. Keller, R. A. Scheltema, J. E. Bruce, A. Leitner, P. Kundrotas, P.
        Beltrao, A. Elofsson, Towards a structurally resolved human protein interaction network. Nat.
        Struct. Mol. Biol. 30, 216–225 (2023). doi:10.1038/s41594-022-00910-8 Medline
17. J. Zhang, J. Pei, J. Durham, T. Bos, Q. Cong, Computed cancer interactome explains the effects of
        somatic mutations in cancers. Protein Sci. 31, e4479 (2022). doi:10.1002/pro.4479 Medline
18. I. R. Humphreys, J. Zhang, M. Baek, Y. Wang, A. Krishnakumar, J. Pei, I. Anishchenko, C. A.
        Tower, B. A. Jackson, T. Warrier, D. T. Hung, S. B. Peterson, J. D. Mougous, Q. Cong, D.
        Baker, Protein interactions in human pathogens revealed through deep learning. Nat. Microbiol.
        9, 2642–2652 (2024). doi:10.1038/s41564-024-01791-x Medline
19. M. Varadi, S. Anyango, M. Deshpande, S. Nair, C. Natassia, G. Yordanova, D. Yuan, O. Stroe, G.
       Wood, A. Laydon, A. Žídek, T. Green, K. Tunyasuvunakool, S. Petersen, J. Jumper, E. Clancy,
       R. Green, A. Vora, M. Lutfi, M. Figurnov, A. Cowie, N. Hobbs, P. Kohli, G. Kleywegt, E.
       Birney, D. Hassabis, S. Velankar, AlphaFold Protein Structure Database: Massively expanding
       the structural coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nucleic Acids
       Res. 50, D439–D444 (2022). doi:10.1093/nar/gkab1061 Medline
20. R. Guigó, Genome annotation: From human genetics to biodiversity genomics. Cell Genom. 3,
       100375 (2023). doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100375 Medline
21. W. De Coster, M. H. Weissensteiner, F. J. Sedlazeck, Towards population-scale long-read
       sequencing. Nat. Rev. Genet. 22, 572–587 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41576-021-00367-3 Medline
22. H. Li, Protein-to-genome alignment with miniprot. Bioinformatics 39, btad014 (2023).
       doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btad014 Medline
23. G. S. C. Slater, E. Birney, Automated generation of heuristics for biological sequence comparison.
        BMC Bioinformatics 6, 31 (2005). doi:10.1186/1471-2105-6-31 Medline
24. D. P. Wall, H. B. Fraser, A. E. Hirsh, Detecting putative orthologs. Bioinformatics 19, 1710–1711
        (2003). doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btg213 Medline
25. S. V. Rajagopala, P. Sikorski, A. Kumar, R. Mosca, J. Vlasblom, R. Arnold, J. Franca-Koh, S. B.
        Pakala, S. Phanse, A. Ceol, R. Häuser, G. Siszler, S. Wuchty, A. Emili, M. Babu, P. Aloy, R.
        Pieper, P. Uetz, The binary protein-protein interaction landscape of Escherichia coli. Nat.
        Biotechnol. 32, 285–290 (2014). doi:10.1038/nbt.2831 Medline
26. M. Steinegger, M. Meier, M. Mirdita, H. Vöhringer, S. J. Haunsberger, J. Söding, HH-suite3 for
       fast remote homology detection and deep protein annotation. BMC Bioinformatics 20, 473
       (2019). doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3019-7 Medline
27. S. Ovchinnikov, H. Park, N. Varghese, P.-S. Huang, G. A. Pavlopoulos, D. E. Kim, H. Kamisetty,
        N. C. Kyrpides, D. Baker, Protein structure determination using metagenome sequence data.
        Science 355, 294–298 (2017). doi:10.1126/science.aah4043 Medline
28. M. Mirdita, K. Schütze, Y. Moriwaki, L. Heo, S. Ovchinnikov, M. Steinegger, ColabFold: Making
       protein folding accessible to all. Nat. Methods 19, 679–682 (2022). doi:10.1038/s41592-022-
       01488-1 Medline
29. H. Alexander, S. K. Hu, A. I. Krinos, M. Pachiadaki, B. J. Tully, C. J. Neely, T. Reiter, Eukaryotic
       genomes from a global metagenomic data set illuminate trophic modes and biogeography of
       ocean plankton. mBio 14, e0167623 (2023). doi:10.1128/mbio.01676-23 Medline

                                                                                                      76
30. S. E. Acuner Ozbabacan, H. B. Engin, A. Gursoy, O. Keskin, Transient protein-protein
        interactions. Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 24, 635–648 (2011). doi:10.1093/protein/gzr025 Medline
31. R. Evans, M. O’Neill, A. Pritzel, N. Antropova, A. Senior, T. Green, A. Žídek, R. Bates, S.
        Blackwell, J. Yim, O. Ronneberger, S. Bodenstein, M. Zielinski, A. Bridgland, A. Potapenko,
        A. Cowie, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Jain, E. Clancy, P. Kohli, J. Jumper, D. Hassabis, Protein
        complex prediction with AlphaFold-Multimer. bioRxiv 2021.10.04.463034 [Preprint] (2022);
        https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.04.463034.
32. J. Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green, A. Pritzel, O. Ronneberger, L. Willmore, A.
        J. Ballard, J. Bambrick, S. W. Bodenstein, D. A. Evans, C.-C. Hung, M. O’Neill, D. Reiman,
        K. Tunyasuvunakool, Z. Wu, A. Žemgulytė, E. Arvaniti, C. Beattie, O. Bertolli, A. Bridgland,
        A. Cherepanov, M. Congreve, A. I. Cowen-Rivers, A. Cowie, M. Figurnov, F. B. Fuchs, H.
        Gladman, R. Jain, Y. A. Khan, C. M. R. Low, K. Perlin, A. Potapenko, P. Savy, S. Singh, A.
        Stecula, A. Thillaisundaram, C. Tong, S. Yakneen, E. D. Zhong, M. Zielinski, A. Žídek, V.
        Bapst, P. Kohli, M. Jaderberg, D. Hassabis, J. M. Jumper, Accurate structure prediction of
        biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature 630, 493–500 (2024). doi:10.1038/s41586-
        024-07487-w Medline
33. M. Varadi, D. Bertoni, P. Magana, U. Paramval, I. Pidruchna, M. Radhakrishnan, M. Tsenkov, S.
       Nair, M. Mirdita, J. Yeo, O. Kovalevskiy, K. Tunyasuvunakool, A. Laydon, A. Žídek, H.
       Tomlinson, D. Hariharan, J. Abrahamson, T. Green, J. Jumper, E. Birney, M. Steinegger, D.
       Hassabis, S. Velankar, AlphaFold Protein Structure Database in 2024: Providing structure
       coverage for over 214 million protein sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 52, D368–D375 (2024).
       doi:10.1093/nar/gkad1011 Medline
34. N. Sen, M. S. Madhusudhan, A structural database of chain–chain and domain–domain interfaces
        of proteins. Protein Sci. 31, e4406 (2022). doi:10.1002/pro.4406
35. R. Verma, S. B. Pandit, Unraveling the structural landscape of intra-chain domain interfaces:
       Implication in the evolution of domain-domain interactions. PLOS ONE 14, e0220336 (2019).
       doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0220336 Medline
36. J. Zhang, R. D. Schaeffer, J. Durham, Q. Cong, N. V. Grishin, DPAM: A domain parser for
        AlphaFold models. Protein Sci. 32, e4548 (2023). doi:10.1002/pro.4548 Medline
37. T. Paysan-Lafosse, M. Blum, S. Chuguransky, T. Grego, B. L. Pinto, G. A. Salazar, M. L. Bileschi,
        P. Bork, A. Bridge, L. Colwell, J. Gough, D. H. Haft, I. Letunić, A. Marchler-Bauer, H. Mi, D.
        A. Natale, C. A. Orengo, A. P. Pandurangan, C. Rivoire, C. J. A. Sigrist, I. Sillitoe, N. Thanki,
        P. D. Thomas, S. C. E. Tosatto, C. H. Wu, A. Bateman, InterPro in 2022. Nucleic Acids Res.
        51, D418–D427 (2023). doi:10.1093/nar/gkac993 Medline
38. M. van Kempen, S. S. Kim, C. Tumescheit, M. Mirdita, J. Lee, C. L. M. Gilchrist, J. Söding, M.
       Steinegger, Fast and accurate protein structure search with Foldseek. Nat. Biotechnol. 42, 243–
       246 (2024). doi:10.1038/s41587-023-01773-0 Medline
39. M. Baek, I. Anishchenko, I. R. Humphreys, Q. Cong, D. Baker, F. DiMaio, Efficient and accurate
       prediction of protein structure using RoseTTAFold2. bioRxiv 2023.05.24.542179 [Preprint]
       (2023); https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.05.24.542179.
40. J. R. Perkins, I. Diboun, B. H. Dessailly, J. G. Lees, C. Orengo, Transient protein-protein
        interactions: Structural, functional, and network properties. Structure 18, 1233–1243 (2010).
        doi:10.1016/j.str.2010.08.007 Medline

                                                                                                        77
41. H. Schweke, M. Pacesa, T. Levin, C. A. Goverde, P. Kumar, Y. Duhoo, L. J. Dornfeld, B.
        Dubreuil, S. Georgeon, S. Ovchinnikov, D. N. Woolfson, B. E. Correia, S. Dey, E. D. Levy, An
        atlas of protein homo-oligomerization across domains of life. Cell 187, 999–1010.e15 (2024).
        doi:10.1016/j.cell.2024.01.022 Medline
42. M. Weigt, R. A. White, H. Szurmant, J. A. Hoch, T. Hwa, Identification of direct residue contacts
       in protein-protein interaction by message passing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 67–72
       (2009). doi:10.1073/pnas.0805923106 Medline
43. K. Luck, D.-K. Kim, L. Lambourne, K. Spirohn, B. E. Begg, W. Bian, R. Brignall, T. Cafarelli, F.
       J. Campos-Laborie, B. Charloteaux, D. Choi, A. G. Coté, M. Daley, S. Deimling, A.
       Desbuleux, A. Dricot, M. Gebbia, M. F. Hardy, N. Kishore, J. J. Knapp, I. A. Kovács, I.
       Lemmens, M. W. Mee, J. C. Mellor, C. Pollis, C. Pons, A. D. Richardson, S. Schlabach, B.
       Teeking, A. Yadav, M. Babor, D. Balcha, O. Basha, C. Bowman-Colin, S.-F. Chin, S. G. Choi,
       C. Colabella, G. Coppin, C. D’Amata, D. De Ridder, S. De Rouck, M. Duran-Frigola, H.
       Ennajdaoui, F. Goebels, L. Goehring, A. Gopal, G. Haddad, E. Hatchi, M. Helmy, Y. Jacob, Y.
       Kassa, S. Landini, R. Li, N. van Lieshout, A. MacWilliams, D. Markey, J. N. Paulson, S.
       Rangarajan, J. Rasla, A. Rayhan, T. Rolland, A. San-Miguel, Y. Shen, D. Sheykhkarimli, G. M.
       Sheynkman, E. Simonovsky, M. Taşan, A. Tejeda, V. Tropepe, J.-C. Twizere, Y. Wang, R. J.
       Weatheritt, J. Weile, Y. Xia, X. Yang, E. Yeger-Lotem, Q. Zhong, P. Aloy, G. D. Bader, J. De
       Las Rivas, S. Gaudet, T. Hao, J. Rak, J. Tavernier, D. E. Hill, M. Vidal, F. P. Roth, M. A.
       Calderwood, A reference map of the human binary protein interactome. Nature 580, 402–408
       (2020). doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2188-x Medline
44. E. L. Huttlin, R. J. Bruckner, J. Navarrete-Perea, J. R. Cannon, K. Baltier, F. Gebreab, M. P. Gygi,
        A. Thornock, G. Zarraga, S. Tam, J. Szpyt, B. M. Gassaway, A. Panov, H. Parzen, S. Fu, A.
        Golbazi, E. Maenpaa, K. Stricker, S. Guha Thakurta, T. Zhang, R. Rad, J. Pan, D. P. Nusinow,
        J. A. Paulo, D. K. Schweppe, L. P. Vaites, J. W. Harper, S. P. Gygi, Dual proteome-scale
        networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human interactome. Cell 184, 3022–3040.e28
        (2021). doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011 Medline
45. S. Maiti, A. Singh, T. Maji, N. V. Saibo, S. De, Experimental methods to study the structure and
       dynamics of intrinsically disordered regions in proteins. Curr. Res. Struct. Biol. 7, 100138
       (2024). doi:10.1016/j.crstbi.2024.100138 Medline
46. Y. Bagheri, A. A. Ali, M. You, Current methods for detecting cell membrane transient interactions.
       Front Chem. 8, 603259 (2020). doi:10.3389/fchem.2020.603259 Medline
47. J. Cheng, G. Novati, J. Pan, C. Bycroft, A. Žemgulytė, T. Applebaum, A. Pritzel, L. H. Wong, M.
        Zielinski, T. Sargeant, R. G. Schneider, A. W. Senior, J. Jumper, D. Hassabis, P. Kohli, Ž.
        Avsec, Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with AlphaMissense.
        Science 381, eadg7492 (2023). doi:10.1126/science.adg7492 Medline
48. H. Gao, T. Hamp, J. Ede, J. G. Schraiber, J. McRae, M. Singer-Berk, Y. Yang, A. S. D. Dietrich, P.
       P. Fiziev, L. F. K. Kuderna, L. Sundaram, Y. Wu, A. Adhikari, Y. Field, C. Chen, S.
       Batzoglou, F. Aguet, G. Lemire, R. Reimers, D. Balick, M. C. Janiak, M. Kuhlwilm, J. D.
       Orkin, S. Manu, A. Valenzuela, J. Bergman, M. Rousselle, F. E. Silva, L. Agueda, J. Blanc, M.
       Gut, D. de Vries, I. Goodhead, R. A. Harris, M. Raveendran, A. Jensen, I. S. Chuma, J. E.
       Horvath, C. Hvilsom, D. Juan, P. Frandsen, F. R. de Melo, F. Bertuol, H. Byrne, I. Sampaio, I.
       Farias, J. V. do Amaral, M. Messias, M. N. F. da Silva, M. Trivedi, R. Rossi, T. Hrbek, N.
       Andriaholinirina, C. J. Rabarivola, A. Zaramody, C. J. Jolly, J. Phillips-Conroy, G. Wilkerson,
       C. Abee, J. H. Simmons, E. Fernandez-Duque, S. Kanthaswamy, F. Shiferaw, D. Wu, L. Zhou,
                                                                                                       78
       Y. Shao, G. Zhang, J. D. Keyyu, S. Knauf, M. D. Le, E. Lizano, S. Merker, A. Navarro, T.
       Bataillon, T. Nadler, C. C. Khor, J. Lee, P. Tan, W. K. Lim, A. C. Kitchener, D. Zinner, I. Gut,
       A. Melin, K. Guschanski, M. H. Schierup, R. M. D. Beck, G. Umapathy, C. Roos, J. P. Boubli,
       M. Lek, S. Sunyaev, A. O’Donnell-Luria, H. L. Rehm, J. Xu, J. Rogers, T. Marques-Bonet, K.
       K.-H. Farh, The landscape of tolerated genetic variation in humans and primates. Science 380,
       eabn8153 (2023). doi:10.1126/science.abn8197 Medline
49. J. Jänes, M. Müller, S. Selvaraj, D. Manoel, J. Stephenson, C. Gonçalves, A. Lafita, B. Polacco, K.
        Obernier, K. Alasoo, M. C. Lemos, N. Krogan, M. Martin, L. R. Saraiva, D. Burke, P. Beltrao,
        Predicted mechanistic impacts of human protein missense variants. bioRxiv 2024.05.29.596373
        [Preprint] (2024); https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.29.596373.
50. J. J. Rocha, S. A. Jayaram, T. J. Stevens, N. Muschalik, R. D. Shah, S. Emran, C. Robles, M.
         Freeman, S. Munro, Functional unknomics: Systematic screening of conserved genes of
         unknown function. PLOS Biol. 21, e3002222 (2023). doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3002222
         Medline
51. A. S. Hauser, M. M. Attwood, M. Rask-Andersen, H. B. Schiöth, D. E. Gloriam, Trends in GPCR
        drug discovery: New agents, targets and indications. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 16, 829–842
        (2017). doi:10.1038/nrd.2017.178 Medline
52. A. Sitaram, M. S. Marks, Mechanisms of protein delivery to melanosomes in pigment cells.
        Physiology 27, 85–99 (2012). doi:10.1152/physiol.00043.2011 Medline
53. X. X. Li, J. D. Lee, C. Kemper, T. M. Woodruff, The complement receptor C5aR2: A powerful
       modulator of innate and adaptive immunity. J. Immunol. 202, 3339–3348 (2019).
       doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1900371 Medline
54. T. Tralau, U. Meyer-Hoffert, J.-M. Schröder, O. Wiedow, Human leukocyte elastase and cathepsin
        G are specific inhibitors of C5a-dependent neutrophil enzyme release and chemotaxis. Exp.
        Dermatol. 13, 316–325 (2004). doi:10.1111/j.0906-6705.2004.00145.x Medline
55. T. Liuyu, K. Yu, L. Ye, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Ren, Z. Cai, Q. Zhu, D. Lin, B. Zhong, Induction
        of OTUD4 by viral infection promotes antiviral responses through deubiquitinating and
        stabilizing MAVS. Cell Res. 29, 67–79 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41422-018-0107-6 Medline
56. Y. Guo, R. Li, Z. Tan, J. Shi, Y. Fu, Y. Song, M. Zhu, L. Zhang, J. Huang, E3 ubiquitin ligase
       ASB8 negatively regulates interferon via regulating TBK1/IKKi homeostasis. Mol. Immunol.
       121, 195–203 (2020). doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2020.03.011 Medline
57. S. M. Borys, A. K. Bag, L. Brossay, D. O. Adeegbe, The yin and yang of targeting KLRG1+ Tregs
       and effector cells. Front. Immunol. 13, 894508 (2022). doi:10.3389/fimmu.2022.894508
       Medline
58. M. Matsumoto, H. Oshiumi, T. Seya, Antiviral responses induced by the TLR3 pathway. Rev. Med.
       Virol. 21, 67–77 (2011). doi:10.1002/rmv.680 Medline
59. M. Genova, L. Grycova, V. Puttrich, M. M. Magiera, Z. Lansky, C. Janke, M. Braun, Tubulin
       polyglutamylation differentially regulates microtubule-interacting proteins. EMBO J. 42,
       e112101 (2023). doi:10.15252/embj.2022112101 Medline
60. N. Peng, F. Nakamura, Microtubule-associated proteins and enzymes modifying tubulin.
        Cytoskeleton 80, 60–76 (2023). doi:10.1002/cm.21748 Medline
61. T. Oda, A. Fukuda, H. Hagiwara, Y. Masuho, M.-A. Muramatsu, K. Hisatake, T. Yamashita,

                                                                                                     79
       ABT1-associated protein (ABTAP), a novel nuclear protein conserved from yeast to mammals,
       represses transcriptional activation by ABT1. J. Cell. Biochem. 93, 788–806 (2004).
       doi:10.1002/jcb.20114 Medline
62. K. Dörner, C. Ruggeri, I. Zemp, U. Kutay, Ribosome biogenesis factors-from names to functions.
       EMBO J. 42, e112699 (2023). doi:10.15252/embj.2022112699 Medline
63. G. Martinez, J. Beurois, D. Dacheux, C. Cazin, M. Bidart, Z.-E. Kherraf, D. R. Robinson, V. Satre,
       G. Le Gac, C. Ka, I. Gourlaouen, Y. Fichou, G. Petre, E. Dulioust, R. Zouari, N. Thierry-Mieg,
       A. Touré, C. Arnoult, M. Bonhivers, P. Ray, C. Coutton, Biallelic variants in MAATS1
       encoding CFAP91, a calmodulin-associated and spoke-associated complex protein, cause
       severe astheno-teratozoospermia and male infertility. J. Med. Genet. 57, 708–716 (2020).
       doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106775 Medline
64. M. Arafat, A. Harlev, I. Har-Vardi, E. Levitas, T. Priel, M. Gershoni, C. Searby, V. C. Sheffield, E.
       Lunenfeld, R. Parvari, Mutation in CATIP (C2orf62) causes oligoteratoasthenozoospermia by
       affecting actin dynamics. J. Med. Genet. 58, 106–115 (2020). doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-
       106825 Medline
65. Y. Sha, W. Liu, S. Li, L. V. Osadchuk, Y. Chen, H. Nie, S. Gao, L. Xie, W. Qin, H. Zhou, L. Li,
        Deficiency in AK9 causes asthenozoospermia and male infertility by destabilising sperm
        nucleotide homeostasis. EBioMedicine 96, 104798 (2023). doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104798
        Medline
66. B. H. M. Meldal, H. Bye-A-Jee, L. Gajdoš, Z. Hammerová, A. Horácková, F. Melicher, L.
       Perfetto, D. Pokorný, M. R. Lopez, A. Türková, E. D. Wong, Z. Xie, E. B. Casanova, N. Del-
       Toro, M. Koch, P. Porras, H. Hermjakob, S. Orchard, Complex Portal 2018: Extended content
       and enhanced visualization tools for macromolecular complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D550–
       D558 (2019). doi:10.1093/nar/gky1001 Medline
67. K. Izumikawa, H. Ishikawa, H. Yoshikawa, S. Fujiyama, A. Watanabe, H. Aburatani, H.
        Tachikawa, T. Hayano, Y. Miura, T. Isobe, R. J. Simpson, L. Li, J. Min, N. Takahashi, LYAR
        potentiates rRNA synthesis by recruiting BRD2/4 and the MYST-type acetyltransferase KAT7
        to rDNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, 10357–10372 (2019). doi:10.1093/nar/gkz747 Medline
68. S. Grill, J. Nandakumar, Molecular mechanisms of telomere biology disorders. J. Biol. Chem. 296,
        100064 (2021). doi:10.1074/jbc.REV120.014017 Medline
69. T. Kinoshita, Biosynthesis and biology of mammalian GPI-anchored proteins. Open Biol. 10,
        190290 (2020). doi:10.1098/rsob.190290 Medline
70. Y.-S. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, L. Zhang, G. Yang, X.-D. Gao, Y. Murakami, M. Fujita, T.
       Kinoshita, Accumulated precursors of specific GPI-anchored proteins upregulate GPI
       biosynthesis with ARV1. J. Cell Biol. 222, e202208159 (2023). doi:10.1083/jcb.202208159
       Medline
71. J. Gonçalves, L. Pelletier, The ciliary transition zone: Finding the pieces and assembling the gate.
        Mol. Cells 40, 243–253 (2017). doi:10.14348/molcells.2017.0054 Medline
72. C. Li, V. L. Jensen, K. Park, J. Kennedy, F. R. Garcia-Gonzalo, M. Romani, R. De Mori, A.-L.
        Bruel, D. Gaillard, B. Doray, E. Lopez, J.-B. Rivière, L. Faivre, C. Thauvin-Robinet, J. F.
        Reiter, O. E. Blacque, E. M. Valente, M. R. Leroux, MKS5 and CEP290 dependent assembly
        pathway of the ciliary transition zone. PLOS Biol. 14, e1002416 (2016).
        doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002416 Medline

                                                                                                       80
73. J. Zhang, I. Humphreys, J. Pei, J. Kim, C. Choi, R. Yuan, J. Durham, S. Liu, H.-J. Choi, M. Baek,
        D. Baker, Q. Cong, RoseTTAFold2-PPI: A fast deep learning method for large-scale protein-
        protein interaction screening. Zenodo (2025); https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15314316.
74. J. Zhang, I. Humphreys, J. Pei, J. Kim, C. Choi, R. Yuan, J. Durham, S. Liu, H. J. Choi, M. Baek,
        D. Baker, Q. Cong, A dataset for predicting protein-protein interactions in humans. Dryad
        (2025); https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.15dv41p84.
75. M. Steinegger, J. Söding, MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for the analysis
       of massive data sets. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 1026–1028 (2017). doi:10.1038/nbt.3988 Medline
76. S. C. Potter, A. Luciani, S. R. Eddy, Y. Park, R. Lopez, R. D. Finn, HMMER web server: 2018
        update. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, W200–W204 (2018). doi:10.1093/nar/gky448 Medline
77. T. A. Thanaraj, F. Clark, J. Muilu, Conservation of human alternative splice events in mouse.
        Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 2544–2552 (2003). doi:10.1093/nar/gkg355 Medline
78. B. Buchfink, K. Reuter, H.-G. Drost, Sensitive protein alignments at tree-of-life scale using
       DIAMOND. Nat. Methods 18, 366–368 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41592-021-01101-x Medline
79. A. G. Murzin, S. E. Brenner, T. Hubbard, C. Chothia, SCOP: A structural classification of proteins
       database for the investigation of sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol. 247, 536–540 (1995).
       doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80134-2 Medline
80. C. A. Orengo, A. D. Michie, S. Jones, D. T. Jones, M. B. Swindells, J. M. Thornton, CATH—A
       hierarchic classification of protein domain structures. Structure 5, 1093–1109 (1997).
       doi:10.1016/S0969-2126(97)00260-8 Medline
81. G. Apic, J. Gough, S. A. Teichmann, Domain combinations in archaeal, eubacterial and eukaryotic
       proteomes. J. Mol. Biol. 310, 311–325 (2001). doi:10.1006/jmbi.2001.4776 Medline
82. C. Chothia, J. Gough, Genomic and structural aspects of protein evolution. Biochem. J. 419, 15–28
       (2009). doi:10.1042/BJ20090122 Medline
83. H. Cheng, R. D. Schaeffer, Y. Liao, L. N. Kinch, J. Pei, S. Shi, B.-H. Kim, N. V. Grishin, ECOD:
       An evolutionary classification of protein domains. PLOS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003926 (2014).
       doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003926 Medline
84. L. Holm, Using Dali for protein structure comparison. Methods Mol. Biol. 2112, 29–42 (2020).
        doi:10.1007/978-1-0716-0270-6_3 Medline
85. T. Paysan-Lafosse, A. Andreeva, M. Blum, S. R. Chuguransky, T. Grego, B. L. Pinto, G. A.
        Salazar, M. L. Bileschi, F. Llinares-López, L. Meng-Papaxanthos, L. J. Colwell, N. V. Grishin,
        R. D. Schaeffer, D. Clementel, S. C. E. Tosatto, E. Sonnhammer, V. Wood, A. Bateman, The
        Pfam protein families database: Embracing AI/ML. Nucleic Acids Res. 53, D523–D534 (2025).
        doi:10.1093/nar/gkae997 Medline
86. R. D. Schaeffer, J. Zhang, L. N. Kinch, J. Pei, Q. Cong, N. V. Grishin, Classification of domains in
       predicted structures of the human proteome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2214069120
       (2023). doi:10.1073/pnas.2214069120 Medline
87. S. F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, D. J. Lipman, Basic local alignment search tool.
        J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410 (1990). doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2 Medline
88. M. Remmert, A. Biegert, A. Hauser, J. Söding, HHblits: Lightning-fast iterative protein sequence
       searching by HMM-HMM alignment. Nat. Methods 9, 173–175 (2011).
       doi:10.1038/nmeth.1818 Medline
                                                                                                    81
89. S. Henikoff, J. G. Henikoff, Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks. Proc. Natl.
        Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89, 10915–10919 (1992). doi:10.1073/pnas.89.22.10915 Medline
90. F. Morcos, T. Hwa, J. N. Onuchic, M. Weigt, Direct coupling analysis for protein contact
        prediction. Methods Mol. Biol. 1137, 55–70 (2014). doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-0366-5_5
        Medline
91. Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful
       approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B Stat. Methodol. 57, 289–300 (2018).
       doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x
92. P. Shannon, A. Markiel, O. Ozier, N. S. Baliga, J. T. Wang, D. Ramage, N. Amin, B.
        Schwikowski, T. Ideker, Cytoscape: A software environment for integrated models of
        biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 13, 2498–2504 (2003).
        doi:10.1101/gr.1239303 Medline
93. B. H. M. Meldal, L. Perfetto, C. Combe, T. Lubiana, J. V. Ferreira Cavalcante, H. Bye-A-Jee, A.
       Waagmeester, N. Del-Toro, A. Shrivastava, E. Barrera, E. Wong, B. Mlecnik, G. Bindea, K.
       Panneerselvam, E. Willighagen, J. Rappsilber, P. Porras, H. Hermjakob, S. Orchard, Complex
       Portal 2022: New curation frontiers. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D578–D586 (2022).
       doi:10.1093/nar/gkab991 Medline
94. J. Szymborski, A. Emad, RAPPPID: Towards generalizable protein interaction prediction with
        AWD-LSTM twin networks. Bioinformatics 38, 3958–3967 (2022).
        doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btac429 Medline
95. S. Sledzieski, R. Singh, L. Cowen, B. Berger, D-SCRIPT translates genome to phenome with
        sequence-based, structure-aware, genome-scale predictions of protein-protein interactions. Cell
        Syst. 12, 969–982.e6 (2021). doi:10.1016/j.cels.2021.08.010 Medline
96. Y. S. Ko, J. Parkinson, C. Liu, W. Wang, TUnA: An uncertainty-aware transformer model for
        sequence-based protein-protein interaction prediction. Brief. Bioinform. 25, bbae359 (2024).
        doi:10.1093/bib/bbae359 Medline
97. J. Bernett, D. B. Blumenthal, M. List, Cracking the black box of deep sequence-based protein-
        protein interaction prediction. Brief. Bioinform. 25, bbae076 (2024). doi:10.1093/bib/bbae076
        Medline
98. J. Chen, N. Sawyer, L. Regan, Protein-protein interactions: General trends in the relationship
        between binding affinity and interfacial buried surface area. Protein Sci. 22, 510–515 (2013).
        doi:10.1002/pro.2230 Medline
99. D. Xiong, Y. Qiu, J. Zhao, Y. Zhou, D. Lee, S. Gupta, M. Torres, W. Lu, S. Liang, J. J. Kang, C.
       Eng, J. Loscalzo, F. Cheng, H. Yu, A structurally informed human protein-protein interactome
       reveals proteome-wide perturbations caused by disease mutations. Nat. Biotechnol. 43, 1510–
       1524 (2025). doi:10.1038/s41587-024-02428-4 Medline
100. D. C. Jeffares, B. Tomiczek, V. Sojo, M. dos Reis, A beginners guide to estimating the non-
       synonymous to synonymous rate ratio of all protein-coding genes in a genome. Methods Mol.
       Biol. 1201, 65–90 (2015). doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-1438-8_4 Medline
101. K. J. Karczewski, L. C. Francioli, G. Tiao, B. B. Cummings, J. Alföldi, Q. Wang, R. L. Collins,
       K. M. Laricchia, A. Ganna, D. P. Birnbaum, L. D. Gauthier, H. Brand, M. Solomonson, N. A.
       Watts, D. Rhodes, M. Singer-Berk, E. M. England, E. G. Seaby, J. A. Kosmicki, R. K. Walters,
       K. Tashman, Y. Farjoun, E. Banks, T. Poterba, A. Wang, C. Seed, N. Whiffin, J. X. Chong, K.
                                                                                                         82
       E. Samocha, E. Pierce-Hoffman, Z. Zappala, A. H. O’Donnell-Luria, E. V. Minikel, B.
       Weisburd, M. Lek, J. S. Ware, C. Vittal, I. M. Armean, L. Bergelson, K. Cibulskis, K. M.
       Connolly, M. Covarrubias, S. Donnelly, S. Ferriera, S. Gabriel, J. Gentry, N. Gupta, T. Jeandet,
       D. Kaplan, C. Llanwarne, R. Munshi, S. Novod, N. Petrillo, D. Roazen, V. Ruano-Rubio, A.
       Saltzman, M. Schleicher, J. Soto, K. Tibbetts, C. Tolonen, G. Wade, M. E. Talkowski, B. M.
       Neale, M. J. Daly, D. G. MacArthur; Genome Aggregation Database Consortium, The
       mutational constraint spectrum quantified from variation in 141,456 humans. Nature 581, 434–
       443 (2020). doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2308-7 Medline
102. Y. P. Conley, J. Jakobsdottir, T. Mah, D. E. Weeks, R. Klein, L. Kuller, R. E. Ferrell, M. B.
       Gorin, CFH, ELOVL4, PLEKHA1 and LOC387715 genes and susceptibility to age-related
       maculopathy: AREDS and CHS cohorts and meta-analyses. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 3206–3218
       (2006). doi:10.1093/hmg/ddl396 Medline




                                                                                                    83
